another word or phrase changed, by passing into his vocabulary, into
something rich and strange.  His own especially is the March month--his
"roaring moon."  His is the spirit of the dawning month of flowers and
storms; the golden, soft names of daffodil and crocus are caught by the
gale as you speak them in his verse, in a fine disproportion with the
energy and gloom.  His was a new apprehension of nature, an increase in
the number, and not only in the sum, of our national apprehensions of
poetry in nature.  Unaware of a separate angel of modern poetry is he who
is insensible to the Tennyson note--the new note that we reaffirm even
with the notes of Vaughan, Traherne, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Blake well in
our ears--the Tennyson note of splendour, all-distinct.  He showed the
perpetually transfigured landscape in transfiguring words.  He is the
captain of our dreams.  Others have lighted a candle in England, he lit a
sun.  Through him our daily suns, and also the backward and historic suns
long since set, which he did not sing, are magnified; and he bestows upon
us an exalted retrospection.  Through him Napoleon's sun of Austerlitz
rises, for us, with a more brilliant menace upon arms and the plain;
through him Fielding's "most melancholy sun" lights the dying man to the
setting-forth on that last voyage of his with such an immortal gleam,
denying hope, as would not have lighted, for us, the memory of that
seaward morning, had our poetry not undergone the illumination, the
transcendent vision, of Tennyson's genius.

Emerson knew that the poet speaks adequately then only when he speaks "a
little wildly, or with the flower of the mind."  Tennyson, the clearest-
headed of poets, is our wild poet; wild, notwithstanding that little
foppery we know of in him--that walking delicately, like Agag; wild,
notwithstanding the work, the ease, the neatness, the finish;
notwithstanding the assertion of manliness which, in asserting, somewhat
misses that mark; a wilder poet than the rough, than the sensual, than
the defiant, than the accuser, than the denouncer.  Wild flowers are
his--great poet--wild winds, wild lights, wild heart, wild eyes!




DICKENS AS A MAN OF LETTERS


It was said for many years, until the reversal that now befalls the
sayings of many years had happened to this also, that Thackeray was the
unkind satirist and Dickens the kind humourist.  The truth seems to be
that Dickens imagined more evil people than did Thackeray, but that he
had an eager faith in good ones.  Nothing places him so entirely out of
date as his trust in human sanctity, his love of it, his hope for it, his
leap at it.  He saw it in a woman's face first met, and drew it to
himself in a man's hand first grasped.  He looked keenly for it.  And if
he associated minor degrees of goodness with any kind of folly or mental
ineptitude, he did not so relate sanctity; though he gave it, for
companion, ignorance; and joined the two, in Joe Gargery, most tenderly.
We might paraphrase, in regard to these two great authors, Dr. Johnson's
famous sentence: "Marriage has many pains, but celibacy has no joys."
Dickens has many scoundrels, but Thackeray has no saints.  Helen
Pendennis is not holy, for she is unjust and cruel; Amelia is not holy,
for she is an egoist in love; Lady Castlewood is not holy, for she too is
cruel; and even Lady Jane is not holy, for she is jealous; nor is Colonel
Newcome holy, for he is haughty; nor Dobbin, for he turns with a taunt
upon a plain sister; nor Esmond, for he squanders his best years in love
for a material beauty; and these are the best of his good people.  And
readers have been taught to praise the work of him who makes none
perfect; one does not meet perfect people in trains or at dinner, and
this seemed good cause that the novelist should be praised for his
moderation; it seemed to imitate the usual measure and moderation of
nature.

But Charles Dickens closed with a divine purpose divinely different.  He
consented to the counsels of perfection.  And thus he made Joe Gargery,
not a man one might easily find in a forge; and Esther Summerson, not a
girl one may easily meet at a dance; and Little Dorrit, who does not come
to do a day's sewing; not that the man and the women are inconceivable,
but that they are unfortunately improbable.  They are creatures created
through a creating mind that worked its six days for the love of good,
and never rested until the seventh, the final Sabbath.  But granting that
they are the counterpart, the heavenly side, of caricature, this is not
to condemn them.  Since when has caricature ceased to be an art good for
man--an honest game between him and nature?  It is a tenable opinion that
frank caricature is a better incident of art than the mere exaggeration
which is the more modern practice.  The words mean the same thing in
their origin--an overloading.  But, as we now generally delimit the
words, they differ.  Caricature, when it has the grotesque inspiration,
makes for laughter, and when it has the celestial, makes for admiration;
in either case there is a good understanding between the author and the
reader, or between the draughtsman and the spectator.  We need not, for
example, suppose that Ibsen sat in a room surrounded by a repeating
pattern of his hair and whiskers on the wallpaper, but it makes us most
exceedingly mirthful and joyous to see him thus seated in Mr. Max
Beerbohm's drawing; and perhaps no girl ever went through life without
harbouring a thought of self, but it is very good for us all to know that
such a girl was thought of by Dickens, that he loved his thought, and
that she is ultimately to be traced, through Dickens, to God.

But exaggeration establishes no good understanding between the reader and
the author.  It is a solemn appeal to our credulity, and we are right to
resent it.  It is the violence of a weakling hand--the worst manner of
violence.  Exaggeration is conspicuous in the newer poetry, and is so
far, therefore, successful, conspicuousness being its aim.  But it was
also the vice of Swinburne, and was the bad example he set to the
generation that thought his tunings to be the finest "music."  For
instance, in an early poem he intends to tell us how a man who loved a
woman welcomed the sentence that condemned him to drown with her, bound,
his impassioned breast against hers, abhorring.  He might have convinced
us of that welcome by one phrase of the profound exactitude of genius.
But he makes his man cry out for the greatest bliss and the greatest
imaginable glory to be bestowed upon the judge who pronounces the
sentence.  And this is merely exaggeration.  One takes pleasure in
rebuking the false ecstasy by a word thus prim and prosaic.  The poet
intended to impose upon us, and he fails; we "withdraw our attention," as
Dr. Johnson did when the conversation became foolish.  In truth we do
more, for we resent exaggeration if we care for our English language.  For
exaggeration writes relaxed, and not elastic, words and verses; and it is
possible that the language suffers something, at least temporarily--during
the life of a couple of generations, let us say--from the loss of
elasticity and rebound brought about by such strain.  Moreover,
exaggeration has always to outdo itself progressively.  There should have
been a Durdles to tell this Swinburne that the habit of exaggerating,
like that of boasting, "grows upon you."

It may be added that later poetry shows us an instance of exaggeration in
the work of that major poet, Mr. Lascelles Abercrombie.  His violence and
vehemence, his extremity, are generally signs not of weakness but of
power; and yet once he reaches a breaking-point that power should never
know.  This is where his Judith holds herself to be so smirched and
degraded by the proffer of a reverent love (she being devoted to one
only, a dead man who had her heart) that thenceforth no bar is left to
her entire self-sacrifice to the loathed enemy Holofernes.  To this, too,
the prim rebuke is the just one, a word for the mouth of governesses: "My
dear, you exaggerate."

It may be briefly said that exaggeration takes for granted some degree of
imbecility in the reader, whereas caricature takes for granted a high
degree of intelligence.  Dickens appeals to our intelligence in all his
caricature, whether heavenly, as in Joe Gargery, or impish, as in Mrs.
Micawber.  The word "caricature" that is used a thousand times to
reproach him is the word that does him singular honour.

If I may define my own devotion to Dickens, it may be stated as chiefly,
though not wholly, admiration of his humour, his dramatic tragedy, and
his watchfulness over inanimate things and landscape.  Passages of his
books that are ranged otherwise than under those characters often leave
me out of the range of their appeal or else definitely offend me.  And
this is not for the customary reason--that Dickens could not draw a
gentleman, that Dickens could not draw a lady.  It matters little whether
he could or not.  But as a fact he did draw a gentleman, and drew him
excellently well, in Cousin Feenix, as Mr. Chesterton has decided.  The
question of the lady we may waive; if it is difficult to prove a
negative, it is difficult also to present one; and to the making, or
producing, or liberating, or detaching, or exalting, of the character of
a lady there enter many negatives; and Dickens was an obvious and a
positive man.  Esther Summerson is a lady, but she is so much besides
that her ladyhood does not detach itself from her sainthood and her
angelhood, so as to be conspicuous--if, indeed, conspicuousness may be
properly predicated of the quality of a lady.  It is a conventional
saying that sainthood and angelhood include the quality of a lady, but
that saying is not true; a lady has a great number of negatives all her
own, and also some things positive that are not at all included in
goodness.  However this may be--and it is not important--Dickens, the
genial Dickens, makes savage sport of women.  Such a company of envious
dames and damsels cannot be found among the persons of the satirist
Thackeray.  Kate Nickleby's beauty brings upon her at first sight the
enmity of her workshop companions; in the innocent pages of "Pickwick"
the aunt is jealous of the niece, and the niece retorts by wounding the
vanity of the aunt as keenly as she may; and so forth through early books
and late.  He takes for granted that the women, old and young, who are
not his heroines, wage this war within the sex, being disappointed by
defect of nature and fortune.  Dickens is master of wit, humour, and
derision; and it must be confessed that his derision is abundant, and is
cast upon an artificially exposed and helpless people; that is, he, a
man, derides the women who miss what a man declared to be their "whole
existence."

The advice which M. Rodin received in his youth from Constant--"Learn to
see the other side; never look at forms only in extent; learn to see them
always in relief"--is the contrary of the counsel proper for a reader of
Dickens.  That counsel should be, "Do not insist upon seeing the immortal
figures of comedy 'in the round.'  You are to be satisfied with their
face value, the face of two dimensions.  It is not necessary that you
should seize Mr. Pecksniff from beyond, and grasp the whole man and his
destinies."  The hypocrite is a figure dreadful and tragic, a shape of
horror; and Mr. Pecksniff is a hypocrite, and a bright image of heart-
easing comedy.  For comic fiction cannot exist without some such paradox.
Without it, where would our laugh be in response to the generous genius
which gives us Mr. Pecksniff's parenthesis to the mention of sirens
("Pagan, I regret to say"); and the scene in which Mr. Pecksniff, after a
stormy domestic scene within, goes as it were accidentally to the door to
admit the rich kinsman he wishes to propitiate?  "Then Mr. Pecksniff,
gently warbling a rustic stave, put on his garden hat, seized a spade,
and opened the street door, as if he thought he had, from his vineyard,
heard a modest rap, but was not quite certain."  The visitor had
thundered at the door while outcries of family strife had been rising in
the house.  "'It is an ancient pursuit, gardening.  Primitive, my dear
sir; for, if I am not mistaken, Adam was the first of the calling.  My
Eve, I grieve to say, is no more, sir; but' (and here he pointed to his
spade, and shook his head, as if he were not cheerful without an effort)
'but I do a little bit of Adam still.'  He had by this time got them into
the best parlour, where the portrait by Spiller and the bust by Spoker
were."  And again, Mr. Pecksniff, hospitable at the supper table:
"'This,' he said, in allusion to the party, not the wine, 'is a Mingling
that repays one for much disappointment and vexation.  Let us be merry.'
Here he took a captain's biscuit.  'It is a poor heart that never
rejoices; and our hearts are not poor.  No!'  With such stimulants to
