intimacy is a profound retreat, an absolute seclusion.  It is more than
single solitude; it is a redoubled isolation more remote than mountains,
safer than valleys, deeper than forests, and further than mid-sea.

That solitude partaken--the only partaken solitude in the world--is the
Point of Honour of ethics.  Treachery to that obligation and a betrayal
of that confidence might well be held to be the least pardonable of all
crimes.  There is no innocent sleep so innocent as sleep shared between a
woman and a child, the little breath hurrying beside the longer, as a
child's foot runs.  But the favourite crime of the sentimentalist is that
of a woman against her child.  Her power, her intimacy, her opportunity,
that should be her accusers, are held to excuse her.  She gains the most
slovenly of indulgences and the grossest compassion, on the vulgar
grounds that her crime was easy.

Lawless and vain art of a certain kind is apt to claim to-day, by the
way, some such fondling as a heroine of the dock receives from common
opinion.  The vain artist had all the opportunities of the situation.  He
was master of his own purpose, such as it was; it was his secret, and the
public was not privy to his artistic conscience.  He does violence to the
obligations of which he is aware, and which the world does not know very
explicitly.  Nothing is easier.  Or he is lawless in a more literal
sense, but only hopes the world will believe that he has a whole code of
his own making.  It would, nevertheless, be less unworthy to break
obvious rules obviously in the obvious face of the public, and to abide
the common rebuke.

It has just been said that a park is by no means necessary for the
preparation of a country solitude.  Indeed, to make those far and wide
and long approaches and avenues to peace seems to be a denial of the
accessibility of what should be so simple.  A step, a pace or so aside,
is enough to lead thither.

A park insists too much, and, besides, does not insist very sincerely.  In
order to fulfil the apparent professions and to keep the published
promise of a park, the owner thereof should be a lover of long seclusion
or of a very life of loneliness.  He should have gained the state of
solitariness which is a condition of life quite unlike any other.  The
traveller who may have gone astray in countries where an almost life-long
solitude is possible knows how invincibly apart are the lonely figures he
has seen in desert places there.  Their loneliness is broken by his
passage, it is true, but hardly so to them.  They look at him, but they
are not aware that he looks at them.  Nay, they look at him as though
they were invisible.  Their un-self-consciousness is absolute; it is in
the wild degree.  They are solitaries, body and soul; even when they are
curious, and turn to watch the passer-by, they are essentially alone.
Now, no one ever found that attitude in a squire's figure, or that look
in any country gentleman's eyes.  The squire is not a life-long solitary.
He never bore himself as though he were invisible.  He never had the
impersonal ways of a herdsman in the remoter Apennines, with a blind,
blank hut in the rocks for his dwelling.  Millet would not even have
taken him as a model for a solitary in the briefer and milder sylvan
solitudes of France.  And yet nothing but a life-long, habitual, and wild
solitariness would be quite proportionate to a park of any magnitude.

If there is a look of human eyes that tells of perpetual loneliness, so
there is also the familiar look that is the sign of perpetual crowds.  It
is the London expression, and, in its way, the Paris expression.  It is
the quickly caught, though not interested, look, the dull but ready
glance of those who do not know of their forfeited place apart; who have
neither the open secret nor the close; no reserve, no need of refuge, no
flight nor impulse of flight; no moods but what they may brave out in the
street, no hope of news from solitary counsels.




THE LADY OF THE LYRICS


She is eclipsed, or gone, or in hiding.  But the sixteenth century took
her for granted as the object of song; she was a class, a state, a sex.
It was scarcely necessary to waste the lyrist's time--time that went so
gaily to metre as not to brook delays--in making her out too clearly.  She
had no more of what later times call individuality than has the rose, her
rival, her foil when she was kinder, her superior when she was cruel, her
ever fresh and ever conventional paragon.  She needed not to be devised
or divined; she was ready.  A merry heart goes all the day; the lyrist's
never grew weary.  Honest men never grow tired of bread or of any other
daily things whereof the sweetness is in their own simplicity.

The lady of the lyrics was not loved in mortal earnest, and her
punishment now and then for her ingratitude was to be told that she was
loved in jest.  She did not love; her fancy was fickle; she was not moved
by long service, which, by the way, was evidently to be taken for granted
precisely like the whole long past of a dream.  She had not a good
temper.  When the poet groans it seems that she has laughed at him; when
he flouts her, we may understand that she has chidden her lyrist in no
temperate terms.  In doing this she has sinned not so much against him as
against Love.  With that she is perpetually reproved.  The lyrist
complains to Love, pities Love for her scorning, and threatens to go away
with Love, who is on his side.  The sweetest verse is tuned to love when
the loved one proves worthy.

There is no record of success for this policy.  She goes on dancing or
scolding, as the case may be, and the lyrist goes on boasting of his
constancy, or suddenly renounces it for a day.  The situation has
variants, but no surprise or ending.  The lover's convention is explicit
enough, but it might puzzle a reader to account for the lady's.  Pride in
her beauty, at any rate, is hers--pride so great that she cannot bring
herself to perceive the shortness of her day.  She is so unobservant as
to need to be told that life is brief, and youth briefer than life; that
the rose fades, and so forth.

Now we need not assume that the lady of the lyrics ever lived.  But
taking her as the perfectly unanimous conception of the lyrists, how is
it she did not discover these things unaided?  Why does the lover
invariably imagine her with a mind intensely irritable under his own
praise and poetry?  Obviously we cannot have her explanation of any of
these matters.  Why do the poets so much lament the absence of truth in
one whose truth would be of little moment?  And why was the convention so
pleasant, among all others, as to occupy a whole age--nay, two great
ages--of literature?

Music seems to be principally answerable.  For the lyrics of the lady are
"words for music" by a great majority.  There is hardly a single poem in
the Elizabethan Song-books, properly so named, that has what would in our
day be called a tone of sentiment.  Music had not then the tone herself;
she was ingenious, and so must the words be.  She had the air of epigram,
and an accurately definite limit.  So, too, the lady of the lyrics, who
might be called the lady of the stanzas, so strictly does she go by
measure.  When she is quarrelsome, it is but fuguishness; when she
dances, she does it by a canon.  She could not but be perverse, merrily
sung to such grave notes.

So fixed was the law of this perversity that none in the song-books is
allowed to be kind enough for a "melody," except one lady only.  She may
thus derogate, for the exceedingly Elizabethan reason that she is
"brown."  She is brown and kind, and a "sad flower," but the song made
for her would have been too insipid, apparently, without an antithesis.
The fair one is warned that her disdain makes her even less lovely than
the brown.

Fair as a lily, hard to please, easily angry, ungrateful for innumerable
verses, uncertain with the regularity of the madrigal, and inconstant
with the punctuality of a stanza, she has gone with the arts of that day;
and neither verse nor music will ever make such another lady.  She
refused to observe the transiency of roses; she never really
intended--much as she was urged--to be a shepherdess; she was never
persuaded to mitigate her dress.  In return, the world has let her
disappear.  She scorned the poets until they turned upon her in the
epigram of many a final couplet; and of these the last has been long
written.  Her "No" was set to counterpoint in the part-song, and she
frightened Love out of her sight in a ballet.  Those occupations are
gone, and the lovely Elizabethan has slipped away.  She was something
less than mortal.

But she who was more than mortal was mortal too.  This was no lady of the
unanimous lyrists, but a rare visitant unknown to these exquisite little
talents.  She was not set for singing, but poetry spoke of her; sometimes
when she was sleeping, and then Fletcher said--

   None can rock Heaven to sleep but her.

Or when she was singing, and Carew rhymed--

   Ask me no more whither doth haste
   The nightingale when May is past;
   For in your sweet dividing throat
   She winters, and keeps warm her note.

Sometimes when the lady was dead, and Carew, again, wrote on her
monument--

   And here the precious dust is laid,
   Whose purely-tempered clay was made
   So fine that it the guest betrayed.

But there was besides another Lady of the lyrics; one who will never pass
from the world, but has passed from song.  In the sixteenth century and
in the seventeenth century this lady was Death.  Her inspiration never
failed; not a poet but found it as fresh as the inspiration of life.
Fancy was not quenched by the inevitable thought in those days, as it is
in ours, and the phrase lost no dignity by the integrity of use.

To every man it happens that at one time of his life--for a space of
years or for a space of months--he is convinced of death with an
incomparable reality.  It might seem as though literature, living the
life of a man, underwent that conviction in those ages.  Death was as
often on the tongues of men in older ages, and oftener in their hands,
but in the sixteenth century it was at their hearts.  The discovery of
death did not shake the poets from their composure.  On the contrary, the
verse is never measured with more majestic effect than when it moves in
honour of this Lady of the lyrics.  Sir Walter Raleigh is but a jerky
writer when he is rhyming other things, however bitter or however solemn;
but his lines on death, which are also lines on immortality, are
infinitely noble.  These are, needless to say, meditations upon death by
law and violence; and so are the ingenious rhymes of Chidiock Tichborne,
written after his last prose in his farewell letter to his wife--"Now,
Sweet-cheek, what is left to bestow on thee, a small recompense for thy
deservings"--and singularly beautiful prose is this.  So also are
Southwell's words.  But these are exceptional deaths, and more dramatic
than was needed to awake the poetry of the meditative age.

It was death as the end of the visible world and of the idle business of
life--not death as a passage nor death as a fear or a darkness--that was
the Lady of the lyrists.  Nor was their song of the act of dying.  With
this a much later and much more trivial literature busied itself.  Those
two centuries felt with a shock that death would bring an end, and that
its equalities would make vain the differences of wit and wealth which
