story.  He was so filled with horror at having realised in his own person
that terrible and well-written scene, and at having done accidentally,
though in fact, what the Mr. Hyde of fiction had done with deliberate
intent, that he ran away as hard as he could go.  He was, however, very
closely followed, and finally he took refuge in a surgery, the door of
which happened to be open, where he explained to a young assistant, who
happened to be there, exactly what had occurred.  The humanitarian crowd
were induced to go away on his giving them a small sum of money, and as
soon as the coast was clear he left.  As he passed out, the name on the
brass door-plate of the surgery caught his eye.  It was 'Jekyll.'  At
least it should have been.--_The Decay of Lying_.




THE INDISPENSABLE EAST


What is true about the drama and the novel is no less true about those
arts that we call the decorative arts.  The whole history of these arts
in Europe is the record of the struggle between Orientalism, with its
frank rejection of imitation, its love of artistic convention, its
dislike to the actual representation of any object in Nature, and our own
imitative spirit.  Wherever the former has been paramount, as in
Byzantium, Sicily and Spain, by actual contact, or in the rest of Europe
by the influence of the Crusades, we have had beautiful and imaginative
work in which the visible things of life are transmuted into artistic
conventions, and the things that Life has not are invented and fashioned
for her delight.  But wherever we have returned to Life and Nature, our
work has always become vulgar, common and uninteresting.  Modern
tapestry, with its aerial effects, its elaborate perspective, its broad
expanses of waste sky, its faithful and laborious realism, has no beauty
whatsoever.  The pictorial glass of Germany is absolutely detestable.  We
are beginning to weave possible carpets in England, but only because we
have returned to the method and spirit of the East.  Our rugs and carpets
of twenty years ago, with their solemn depressing truths, their inane
worship of Nature, their sordid reproductions of visible objects, have
become, even to the Philistine, a source of laughter.  A cultured
Mahomedan once remarked to us, "You Christians are so occupied in
misinterpreting the fourth commandment that you have never thought of
making an artistic application of the second."  He was perfectly right,
and the whole truth of the matter is this: The proper school to learn art
in is not Life but Art.--_The Decay of Lying_.




THE INFLUENCE OF THE IMPRESSIONISTS ON CLIMATE


Where, if not from the Impressionists, do we get those wonderful brown
fogs that come creeping down our streets, blurring the gas-lamps and
changing the houses into monstrous shadows?  To whom, if not to them and
their master, do we owe the lovely silver mists that brood over our
river, and turn to faint forms of fading grace curved bridge and swaying
barge?  The extraordinary change that has taken place in the climate of
London during the last ten years is entirely due to a particular school
of Art.  You smile.  Consider the matter from a scientific or a
metaphysical point of view, and you will find that I am right.  For what
is Nature?  Nature is no great mother who has borne us.  She is our
creation.  It is in our brain that she quickens to life.  Things are
because we see them, and what we see, and how we see it, depends on the
Arts that have influenced us.  To look at a thing is very different from
seeing a thing.  One does not see anything until one sees its beauty.
Then, and then only, does it come into existence.  At present, people see
fogs, not because there are fogs, but because poets and painters have
taught them the mysterious loveliness of such effects.  There may have
been fogs for centuries in London.  I dare say there were.  But no one
saw them, and so we do not know anything about them.  They did not exist
till Art had invented them.  Now, it must be admitted, fogs are carried
to excess.  They have become the mere mannerism of a clique, and the
exaggerated realism of their method gives dull people bronchitis.  Where
the cultured catch an effect, the uncultured catch cold.  And so, let us
be humane, and invite Art to turn her wonderful eyes elsewhere.  She has
done so already, indeed.  That white quivering sunlight that one sees now
in France, with its strange blotches of mauve, and its restless violet
shadows, is her latest fancy, and, on the whole, Nature reproduces it
quite admirably.  Where she used to give us Corots and Daubignys, she
gives us now exquisite Monets and entrancing Pissaros.  Indeed there are
moments, rare, it is true, but still to be observed from time to time,
when Nature becomes absolutely modern.  Of course she is not always to be
relied upon.  The fact is that she is in this unfortunate position.  Art
creates an incomparable and unique effect, and, having done so, passes on
to other things.  Nature, upon the other hand, forgetting that imitation
can be made the sincerest form of insult, keeps on repeating this effect
until we all become absolutely wearied of it.  Nobody of any real
culture, for instance, ever talks nowadays about the beauty of a sunset.
Sunsets are quite old-fashioned.  They belong to the time when Turner was
the last note in art.  To admire them is a distinct sign of provincialism
of temperament.  Upon the other hand they go on.--_The Decay of Lying_.




AN EXPOSURE OF NATURALISM


After all, what the imitative arts really give us are merely the various
styles of particular artists, or of certain schools of artists.  Surely
you don't imagine that the people of the Middle Ages bore any resemblance
at all to the figures on mediaeval stained glass, or in mediaeval stone
and wood carving, or on mediaeval metal-work, or tapestries, or
illuminated MSS.  They were probably very ordinary-looking people, with
nothing grotesque, or remarkable, or fantastic in their appearance.  The
Middle Ages, as we know them in art, are simply a definite form of style,
and there is no reason at all why an artist with this style should not be
produced in the nineteenth century.  No great artist ever sees things as
they really are.  If he did, he would cease to be an artist.  Take an
example from our own day.  I know that you are fond of Japanese things.
Now, do you really imagine that the Japanese people, as they are
presented to us in art, have any existence?  If you do, you have never
understood Japanese art at all.  The Japanese people are the deliberate
self-conscious creation of certain individual artists.  If you set a
picture by Hokusai, or Hokkei, or any of the great native painters,
beside a real Japanese gentleman or lady, you will see that there is not
the slightest resemblance between them.  The actual people who live in
Japan are not unlike the general run of English people; that is to say,
they are extremely commonplace, and have nothing curious or extraordinary
about them.  In fact the whole of Japan is a pure invention.  There is no
such country, there are no such people.  One of our most charming
painters {3} went recently to the Land of the Chrysanthemum in the
foolish hope of seeing the Japanese.  All he saw, all he had the chance
of painting, were a few lanterns and some fans.  He was quite unable to
discover the inhabitants, as his delightful exhibition at Messrs.
Dowdeswell's Gallery showed only too well.  He did not know that the
Japanese people are, as I have said, simply a mode of style, an exquisite
fancy of art.  And so, if you desire to see a Japanese effect, you will
not behave like a tourist and go to Tokio.  On the contrary, you will
stay at home and steep yourself in the work of certain Japanese artists,
and then, when you have absorbed the spirit of their style, and caught
their imaginative manner of vision, you will go some afternoon and sit in
the Park or stroll down Piccadilly, and if you cannot see an absolutely
Japanese effect there, you will not see it anywhere.  Or, to return again
to the past, take as another instance the ancient Greeks.  Do you think
that Greek art ever tells us what the Greek people were like?  Do you
believe that the Athenian women were like the stately dignified figures
of the Parthenon frieze, or like those marvellous goddesses who sat in
the triangular pediments of the same building?  If you judge from the
art, they certainly were so.  But read an authority, like Aristophanes,
for instance.  You will find that the Athenian ladies laced tightly, wore
high-heeled shoes, dyed their hair yellow, painted and rouged their
faces, and were exactly like any silly fashionable or fallen creature of
our own day.  The fact is that we look back on the ages entirely through
the medium of art, and art, very fortunately, has never once told us the
truth.--_The Decay of Lying_.




THOMAS GRIFFITHS WAINEWRIGHT


He was taken back to Newgate, preparatory to his removal to the colonies.
In a fanciful passage in one of his early essays he had fancied himself
'lying in Horsemonger Gaol under sentence of death' for having been
unable to resist the temptation of stealing some Marc Antonios from the
British Museum in order to complete his collection.  The sentence now
passed on him was to a man of his culture a form of death.  He complained
bitterly of it to his friends, and pointed out, with a good deal of
reason, some people may fancy, that the money was practically his own,
having come to him from his mother, and that the forgery, such as it was,
had been committed thirteen years before, which, to use his own phrase,
was at least a _circonstance attenuante_.  The permanence of personality
is a very subtle metaphysical problem, and certainly the English law
solves the question in an extremely rough-and-ready manner.  There is,
however, something dramatic in the fact that this heavy punishment was
inflicted on him for what, if we remember his fatal influence on the
prose of modern journalism, was certainly not the worst of all his sins.

While he was in gaol, Dickens, Macready, and Hablot Browne came across
him by chance.  They had been going over the prisons of London, searching
for artistic effects, and in Newgate they suddenly caught sight of
Wainewright.  He met them with a defiant stare, Forster tells us, but
Macready was 'horrified to recognise a man familiarly known to him in
former years, and at whose table he had dined.'

Others had more curiosity, and his cell was for some time a kind of
fashionable lounge.  Many men of letters went down to visit their old
literary comrade.  But he was no longer the kind light-hearted Janus whom
Charles Lamb admired.  He seems to have grown quite cynical.

To the agent of an insurance company who was visiting him one afternoon,
and thought he would improve the occasion by pointing out that, after
all, crime was a bad speculation, he replied: 'Sir, you City men enter on
your speculations, and take the chances of them.  Some of your
speculations succeed, some fail.  Mine happen to have failed, yours
happen to have succeeded.  That is the only difference, sir, between my
visitor and me.  But, sir, I will tell you one thing in which I have
succeeded to the last.  I have been determined through life to hold the
position of a gentleman.  I have always done so.  I do so still.  It is
the custom of this place that each of the inmates of a cell shall take
his morning's turn of sweeping it out.  I occupy a cell with a bricklayer
and a sweep, but they never offer me the broom!'  When a friend
reproached him with the murder of Helen Abercrombie he shrugged his
shoulders and said, 'Yes; it was a dreadful thing to do, but she had very
thick ankles.'--_Pen, Pencil and Poison_.




