wished to surprise him by the gift of some distinguished reward. But the
effort to complete a certain work, involving immense labor, before
the departure of the Emperor for Spain caused the death of the devoted
servant, who was seized with an inflammatory fever. When the Emperor,
who remained in Paris for a few days after his return to prepare for the
campaign of 1809, was told of Bridau's death he said: "There are men
who can never be replaced." Struck by the spectacle of a devotion which
could receive none of the brilliant recognitions that reward a soldier,
the Emperor resolved to create an order to requite civil services, just
as he had already created the Legion of honor to reward the military.
The impression he received from the death of Bridau led him to plan
the order of the Reunion. He had not time, however, to mature this
aristocratic scheme, the recollection of which is now so completely
effaced that many of my readers may ask what were its insignia: the
order was worn with a blue ribbon. The Emperor called it the Reunion,
under the idea of uniting the order of the Golden Fleece of Spain with
the order of the Golden Fleece of Austria. "Providence," said a Prussian
diplomatist, "took care to frustrate the profanation."

After Bridau's death the Emperor inquired into the circumstances of his
widow. Her two sons each received a scholarship in the Imperial Lyceum,
and the Emperor paid the whole costs of their education from his
privy purse. He gave Madame Bridau a pension of four thousand francs,
intending, no doubt, to advance the fortune of her sons in future years.

From the time of her marriage to the death of her husband, Agathe had
held no communication with Issoudun. She lost her mother just as she was
on the point of giving birth to her youngest son, and when her father,
who, as she well knew, loved her little, died, the coronation of the
Emperor was at hand, and that event gave Bridau so much additional work
that she was unwilling to leave him. Her brother, Jean-Jacques Rouget,
had not written to her since she left Issoudun. Though grieved by the
tacit repudiation of her family, Agathe had come to think seldom of
those who never thought of her. Once a year she received a letter from
her godmother, Madame Hochon, to whom she replied with commonplaces,
paying no heed to the advice which that pious and excellent woman gave
to her, disguised in cautious words.

Some time before the death of Doctor Rouget, Madame Hochon had written
to her goddaughter warning her that she would get nothing from her
father's estate unless she gave a power of attorney to Monsieur Hochon.
Agathe was very reluctant to harass her brother. Whether it were that
Bridau thought the spoliation of his wife in accordance with the laws
and customs of Berry, or that, high-minded as he was, he shared the
magnanimity of his wife, certain it is that he would not listen to
Roguin, his notary, who advised him to take advantage of his ministerial
position to contest the deeds by which the father had deprived the
daughter of her legitimate inheritance. Husband and wife thus tacitly
sanctioned what was done at Issoudun. Nevertheless, Roguin had forced
Bridau to reflect upon the future interests of his wife which were thus
compromised. He saw that if he died before her, Agathe would be left
without property, and this led him to look into his own affairs. He
found that between 1793 and 1805 his wife and he had been obliged to use
nearly thirty thousand of the fifty thousand francs in cash which old
Rouget had given to his daughter at the time of her marriage. He at once
invested the remaining twenty thousand in the public funds, then quoted
at forty, and from this source Agathe received about two thousand francs
a year. As a widow, Madame Bridau could live suitably on an income of
six thousand francs. With provincial good sense, she thought of changing
her residence, dismissing the footman, and keeping no servant except a
cook; but her intimate friend, Madame Descoings, who insisted on being
considered her aunt, sold her own establishment and came to live with
Agathe, turning the study of the late Bridau into her bedroom.

The two widows clubbed their revenues, and so were in possession of a
joint income of twelve thousand francs a year. This seems a very
simple and natural proceeding. But nothing in life is more deserving of
attention than the things that are called natural; we are on our guard
against the unnatural and extraordinary. For this reason, you will find
men of experience--lawyers, judges, doctors, and priests--attaching
immense importance to simple matters; and they are often thought
over-scrupulous. But the serpent amid flowers is one of the finest myths
that antiquity has bequeathed for the guidance of our lives. How often
we hear fools, trying to excuse themselves in their own eyes or in the
eyes of others, exclaiming, "It was all so natural that any one would
have been taken in."

In 1809, Madame Descoings, who never told her age, was sixty-five. In
her heyday she had been popularly called a beauty, and was now one
of those rare women whom time respects. She owed to her excellent
constitution the privilege of preserving her good looks, which, however,
would not bear close examination. She was of medium height, plump, and
fresh, with fine shoulders and a rather rosy complexion. Her blond hair,
bordering on chestnut, showed, in spite of her husband's catastrophe,
not a tinge of gray. She loved good cheer, and liked to concoct nice
little made dishes; yet, fond as she was of eating, she also adored
the theatre and cherished a vice which she wrapped in impenetrable
mystery--she bought into lotteries. Can that be the abyss of which
mythology warns us under the fable of the Danaides and their cask?
Madame Descoings, like other women who are lucky enough to keep young
for many years, spend rather too much upon her dress; but aside from
these trifling defects she was the pleasantest of women to live with.
Of every one's opinion, never opposing anybody, her kindly and
communicative gayety gave pleasure to all. She had, moreover, a Parisian
quality which charmed the retired clerks and elderly merchants of her
circle,--she could take and give a jest. If she did not marry a third
time it was no doubt the fault of the times. During the wars of the
Empire, marrying men found rich and handsome girls too easily to trouble
themselves about women of sixty.

Madame Descoings, always anxious to cheer Madame Bridau, often took the
latter to the theatre, or to drive; prepared excellent little dinners
for her delectation, and even tried to marry her to her own son by her
first husband, Bixiou. Alas! to do this, she was forced to reveal a
terrible secret, carefully kept by her, by her late husband, and by
her notary. The young and beautiful Madame Descoings, who passed for
thirty-six years old, had a son who was thirty-five, named Bixiou,
already a widower, a major in the Twenty-Fourth Infantry, who
subsequently perished at Lutzen, leaving behind him an only son. Madame
Descoings, who only saw her grandson secretly, gave out that he was the
son of the first wife of her first husband. The revelation was partly
a prudential act; for this grandson was being educated with Madame
Bridau's sons at the Imperial Lyceum, where he had a half-scholarship.
The lad, who was clever and shrewd at school, soon after made himself a
great reputation as draughtsman and designer, and also as a wit.

Agathe, who lived only for her children, declined to re-marry, as much
from good sense as from fidelity to her husband. But it is easier for a
woman to be a good wife than to be a good mother. A widow has two
tasks before her, whose duties clash: she is a mother, and yet she must
exercise parental authority. Few women are firm enough to understand and
practise this double duty. Thus it happened that Agathe, notwithstanding
her many virtues, was the innocent cause of great unhappiness. In the
first place, through her lack of intelligence and the blind confidence
to which such noble natures are prone, Agathe fell a victim to Madame
Descoings, who brought a terrible misfortune on the family. That worthy
soul was nursing up a combination of three numbers called a "trey" in a
lottery, and lotteries give no credit to their customers. As manager of
the joint household, she was able to pay up her stakes with the money
intended for their current expenses, and she went deeper and deeper into
debt, with the hope of ultimately enriching her grandson Bixiou, her
dear Agathe, and the little Bridaus. When the debts amounted to ten
thousand francs, she increased her stakes, trusting that her favorite
trey, which had not turned up in nine years, would come at last, and
fill to overflowing the abysmal deficit.

From that moment the debt rolled up rapidly. When it reached twenty
thousand francs, Madame Descoings lost her head, still failing to win
the trey. She tried to mortgage her own property to pay her niece, but
Roguin, who was her notary, showed her the impossibility of carrying out
that honorable intention. The late Doctor Rouget had laid hold of the
property of the brother-in-law after the grocer's execution, and had,
as it were, disinherited Madame Descoings by securing to her a
life-interest on the property of his own son, Jean-Jacques Rouget. No
money-lender would think of advancing twenty thousand francs to a woman
sixty-six years of age, on an annuity of about four thousand, at a
period when ten per cent could easily be got for an investment. So one
morning Madame Descoings fell at the feet of her niece, and with sobs
confessed the state of things. Madame Bridau did not reproach her; she
sent away the footman and cook, sold all but the bare necessities of her
furniture, sold also three-fourths of her government funds, paid off the
debts, and bade farewell to her _appartement_.




CHAPTER II

One of the worst corners in all Paris is undoubtedly that part of the
rue Mazarin which lies between the rue Guenegard and its junction with
the rue de Seine, behind the palace of the Institute. The high gray
walls of the college and of the library which Cardinal Mazarin presented
to the city of Paris, and which the French Academy was in after days to
inhabit, cast chill shadows over this angle of the street, where the sun
seldom shines, and the north wind blows. The poor ruined widow came to
live on the third floor of a house standing at this damp, dark, cold
corner. Opposite, rose the Institute buildings, in which were the
dens of ferocious animals known to the bourgeoisie under the name of
artists,--under that of tyro, or rapin, in the studios. Into these
dens they enter rapins, but they may come forth prix de Rome. The
transformation does not take place without extraordinary uproar and
disturbance at the time of year when the examinations are going on, and
the competitors are shut up in their cells. To win a prize, they were
obliged, within a given time, to make, if a sculptor, a clay model; if a
painter, a picture such as may be seen at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts; if
a musician, a cantata; if an architect, the plans for a public building.
At the time when we are penning the words, this menagerie has already
been removed from these cold and cheerless buildings, and taken to the
elegant Palais des Beaux-Arts, which stands near by.

From the windows of Madame Bridau's new abode, a glance could penetrate
the depths of those melancholy barred cages. To the north, the view was
shut in by the dome of the Institute; looking up the street, the only
distraction to the eye was a file of hackney-coaches, which stood at
the upper end of the rue Mazarin. After a while, the widow put boxes of
earth in front of her windows, and cultivated those aerial gardens that
police regulations forbid, though their vegetable products purify the
atmosphere. The house, which backed up against another fronting on the
rue de Seine, was necessarily shallow, and the staircase wound round
upon itself. The third floor was the last. Three windows to three rooms,
namely, a dining-room, a small salon, and a chamber on one side of the
landing; on the other, a little kitchen, and two single rooms; above, an
immense garret without partitions. Madame Bridau chose this lodging for
three reasons: economy, for it cost only four hundred francs a year,
so that she took a lease of it for nine years; proximity to her sons'
school, the Imperial Lyceum being at a short distance; thirdly, because
it was in the quarter to which she was used.

The inside of the _appartement_ was in keeping with the general look of
the house. The dining-room, hung with a yellow paper covered with little
