melting pot after another, and convictions and forms and moral systems
become so many meaningless words to him. The one thing that always
remains, the one sure instinct that nature has implanted in us, is the
instinct of self-interest. If you had lived as long as I have, you would
know that there is but one concrete reality invariable enough to be
worth caring about, and that is--GOLD. Gold represents every form of
human power. I have traveled. I found out that there were either hills
or plains everywhere: the plains are monotonous, the hills a weariness;
consequently, place may be left out of the question. As to manners; man
is man all the world over. The same battle between the poor and the rich
is going on everywhere; it is inevitable everywhere; consequently, it is
better to exploit than to be exploited. Everywhere you find the man of
thews and sinews who toils, and the lymphatic man who torments himself;
and pleasures are everywhere the same, for when all sensations are
exhausted, all that survives is Vanity--Vanity is the abiding substance
of us, the _I_ in us. Vanity is only to be satisfied by gold in floods.
Our dreams need time and physical means and painstaking thought before
they can be realized. Well, gold contains all things in embryo; gold
realizes all things for us.

"'None but fools and invalids can find pleasure in shuffling cards all
evening long to find out whether they shall win a few pence at the end.
None but driveling idiots could spend time in inquiring into all that
is happening around them, whether Madame Such-an-One slept single on
her couch or in company, whether she has more blood than lymph, more
temperament than virtue. None but the dupes, who fondly imagine that
they are useful to their like, can interest themselves in laying down
rules for political guidance amid events which neither they nor any one
else foresees, nor ever will foresee. None but simpletons can delight
in talking about stage players and repeating their sayings; making the
daily promenade of a caged animal over a rather larger area; dressing
for others, eating for others, priding themselves on a horse or a
carriage such as no neighbor can have until three days later. What is
all this but Parisian life summed up in a few phrases? Let us find a
higher outlook on life than theirs. Happiness consists either in strong
emotions which drain our vitality, or in methodical occupation which
makes existence like a bit of English machinery, working with the
regularity of clockwork. A higher happiness than either consists in a
curiosity, styled noble, a wish to learn Nature's secrets, or to attempt
by artificial means to imitate Nature to some extent. What is this in
two words but Science and Art, or passion or calm?--Ah! well, every
human passion wrought up to its highest pitch in the struggle for
existence comes to parade itself before me--as I live in calm. As for
your scientific curiosity, a kind of wrestling bout in which man is
never uppermost, I replace it by an insight into all the springs of
action in man and woman. To sum up, the world is mine without effort of
mine, and the world has not the slightest hold on me. Listen to this,'
he went on, 'I will tell you the history of my morning, and you will
divine my pleasures.'

"He got up, pushed the bolt of the door, drew a tapestry curtain across
it with a sharp grating sound of the rings on the rod, then he sat down
again.

"'This morning,' he said, 'I had only two amounts to collect; the rest
of the bills that were due I gave away instead of cash to my customers
yesterday. So much saved, you see, for when I discount a bill I always
deduct two francs for a hired brougham--expenses of collection. A pretty
thing it would be, would it not, if my clients were to set _me_ trudging
all over Paris for half-a-dozen francs of discount, when no man is my
master, and I only pay seven francs in the shape of taxes?

"'The first bill for a thousand francs was presented by a young fellow,
a smart buck with a spangled waistcoat, and an eyeglass, and a tilbury
and an English horse, and all the rest of it. The bill bore the
signature of one of the prettiest women in Paris, married to a Count, a
great landowner. Now, how came that Countess to put her name to a
bill of exchange, legally not worth the paper it was written upon, but
practically very good business; for these women, poor things, are afraid
of the scandal that a protested bill makes in a family, and would give
themselves away in payment sooner than fail? I wanted to find out what
that bill of exchange really represented. Was it stupidity, imprudence,
love or charity?

"'The second bill, bearing the signature "Fanny Malvaut," came to me
from a linen-draper on the highway to bankruptcy. Now, no creature who
has any credit with a bank comes to _me_. The first step to my door
means that a man is desperately hard up; that the news of his failure
will soon come out: and, most of all, it means that he has been
everywhere else first. The stag is always at bay when I see him, and a
pack of creditors are hard upon his track. The Countess lived in the Rue
du Helder, and my Fanny in the Rue Montmartre. How many conjectures I
made as I set out this morning! If these two women were not able to pay,
they would show me more respect than they would show their own fathers.
What tricks and grimaces would not the Countess try for a thousand
francs! She would be so nice to me, she would talk to me in that
ingratiating tone peculiar to endorsers of bills, she would pour out
a torrent of coaxing words, perhaps she would beg and pray, and I...'
(here the old man turned his pale eyes upon me)--'and I not to be moved,
inexorable!' he continued. 'I am there as the avenger, the apparition of
Remorse. So much for hypotheses. I reached the house.

"'"Madame la Comtesse is asleep," says the maid.

"'"When can I see her?"

"'"At twelve o'clock."

"'"Is Madame la Comtesse ill?"

"'"No, sir, but she only came home at three o'clock this morning from a
ball."

"'"My name is Gobseck, tell her that I shall call again at twelve
o'clock," and I went out, leaving traces of my muddy boots on the carpet
which covered the paved staircase. I like to leave mud on a rich man's
carpet; it is not petty spite; I like to make them feel a touch of the
claws of Necessity. In the Rue Montmartre I thrust open the old gateway
of a poor-looking house, and looked into a dark courtyard where the
sunlight never shines. The porter's lodge was grimy, the window looked
like the sleeve of some shabby wadded gown--greasy, dirty, and full of
holes.

"'"Mlle. Fanny Malvaut?"

"'"She has gone out; but if you have come about a bill, the money is
waiting for you."

"'"I will look in again," said I.

"'As soon as I knew that the porter had the money for me, I wanted to
know what the girl was like; I pictured her as pretty. The rest of the
morning I spent in looking at the prints in the shop windows along the
boulevard; then, just as it struck twelve, I went through the Countess'
ante-chamber.

"'"Madame has just this minute rung for me," said the maid; "I don't
think she can see you yet."

"'"I will wait," said I, and sat down in an easy-chair.

"'Venetian shutters were opened, and presently the maid came hurrying
back.

"'"Come in, sir."

"'From the sweet tone of the girl's voice, I knew that the mistress
could not be ready to pay. What a handsome woman it was that I saw in
another moment! She had flung an Indian shawl hastily over her bare
shoulders, covering herself with it completely, while it revealed the
bare outlines of the form beneath. She wore a loose gown trimmed with
snowy ruffles, which told plainly that her laundress' bills amounted
to something like two thousand francs in the course of a year. Her
dark curls escaped from beneath a bright Indian handkerchief, knotted
carelessly about her head after the fashion of Creole women. The bed lay
in disorder that told of broken slumber. A painter would have paid money
to stay a while to see the scene that I saw. Under the luxurious hanging
draperies, the pillow, crushed into the depths of an eider-down quilt,
its lace border standing out in contrast against the background of blue
silk, bore a vague impress that kindled the imagination. A pair of
satin slippers gleamed from the great bear-skin rug spread by the carved
mahogany lions at the bed-foot, where she had flung them off in her
weariness after the ball. A crumpled gown hung over a chair, the sleeves
touching the floor; stockings which a breath would have blown away were
twisted about the leg of an easy-chair; while ribbon garters straggled
over a settee. A fan of price, half unfolded, glittered on the
chimney-piece. Drawers stood open; flowers, diamonds, gloves, a bouquet,
a girdle, were littered about. The room was full of vague sweet perfume.
And--beneath all the luxury and disorder, beauty and incongruity, I saw
Misery crouching in wait for her or for her adorer, Misery rearing its
head, for the Countess had begun to feel the edge of those fangs.
Her tired face was an epitome of the room strewn with relics of past
festival. The scattered gewgaws, pitiable this morning, when gathered
together and coherent, had turned heads the night before.

"'What efforts to drink of the Tantalus cup of bliss I could read
in these traces of love stricken by the thunderbolt remorse--in this
visible presentment of a life of luxury, extravagance, and riot. There
were faint red marks on her young face, signs of the fineness of the
skin; but her features were coarsened, as it were, and the circles about
her eyes were unwontedly dark. Nature nevertheless was so vigorous in
her, that these traces of past folly did not spoil her beauty. Her eyes
glittered. She looked like some _Herodias_ of da Vinci's (I have dealt
in pictures), so magnificently full of life and energy was she; there
was nothing starved nor stinted in feature or outline; she awakened
desire; it seemed to me that there was some passion in her yet stronger
than love. I was taken with her. It was a long while since my heart
had throbbed; so I was paid then and there--for I would give a thousand
francs for a sensation that should bring me back memories of youth.

"'"Monsieur," she said, finding a chair for me, "will you be so good as
to wait?"

"'"Until this time to-morrow, madame," I said, folding up the bill
again. "I cannot legally protest this bill any sooner." And within
myself I said--"Pay the price of your luxury, pay for your name, pay for
your ease, pay for the monopoly which you enjoy! The rich have invented
judges and courts of law to secure their goods, and the guillotine--that
candle in which so many lie in silk, under silken coverlets, there is
remorse, and grinding of teeth beneath a smile, and those fantastical
lions' jaws are gaping to set their fangs in your heart."

"'"Protest the bill! Can you mean it?" she cried, with her eyes upon me;
"could you have so little consideration for me?"

"'"If the King himself owed money to me, madame, and did not pay it, I
should summons him even sooner than any other debtor."

"'While we were speaking, somebody tapped gently at the door.

