best thing to a bishopric, it was so snug.  I loved the landlord's
youngest daughter to distraction,--but let that pass.  It was in this Inn
that I was cried over by my rosy little sister, because I had acquired a
black eye in a fight.  And though she had been, that Holly-Tree night,
for many a long year where all tears are dried, the Mitre softened me
yet.

"To be continued to-morrow," said I, when I took my candle to go to bed.
But my bed took it upon itself to continue the train of thought that
night.  It carried me away, like the enchanted carpet, to a distant place
(though still in England), and there, alighting from a stage-coach at
another Inn in the snow, as I had actually done some years before, I
repeated in my sleep a curious experience I had really had there.  More
than a year before I made the journey in the course of which I put up at
that Inn, I had lost a very near and dear friend by death.  Every night
since, at home or away from home, I had dreamed of that friend; sometimes
as still living; sometimes as returning from the world of shadows to
comfort me; always as being beautiful, placid, and happy, never in
association with any approach to fear or distress.  It was at a lonely
Inn in a wide moorland place, that I halted to pass the night.  When I
had looked from my bedroom window over the waste of snow on which the
moon was shining, I sat down by my fire to write a letter.  I had always,
until that hour, kept it within my own breast that I dreamed every night
of the dear lost one.  But in the letter that I wrote I recorded the
circumstance, and added that I felt much interested in proving whether
the subject of my dream would still be faithful to me, travel-tired, and
in that remote place.  No.  I lost the beloved figure of my vision in
parting with the secret.  My sleep has never looked upon it since, in
sixteen years, but once.  I was in Italy, and awoke (or seemed to awake),
the well-remembered voice distinctly in my ears, conversing with it.  I
entreated it, as it rose above my bed and soared up to the vaulted roof
of the old room, to answer me a question I had asked touching the Future
Life.  My hands were still outstretched towards it as it vanished, when I
heard a bell ringing by the garden wall, and a voice in the deep
stillness of the night calling on all good Christians to pray for the
souls of the dead; it being All Souls' Eve.

To return to the Holly-Tree.  When I awoke next day, it was freezing
hard, and the lowering sky threatened more snow.  My breakfast cleared
away, I drew my chair into its former place, and, with the fire getting
so much the better of the landscape that I sat in twilight, resumed my
Inn remembrances.

That was a good Inn down in Wiltshire where I put up once, in the days of
the hard Wiltshire ale, and before all beer was bitterness.  It was on
the skirts of Salisbury Plain, and the midnight wind that rattled my
lattice window came moaning at me from Stonehenge.  There was a hanger-on
at that establishment (a supernaturally preserved Druid I believe him to
have been, and to be still), with long white hair, and a flinty blue eye
always looking afar off; who claimed to have been a shepherd, and who
seemed to be ever watching for the reappearance, on the verge of the
horizon, of some ghostly flock of sheep that had been mutton for many
ages.  He was a man with a weird belief in him that no one could count
the stones of Stonehenge twice, and make the same number of them;
likewise, that any one who counted them three times nine times, and then
stood in the centre and said, "I dare!" would behold a tremendous
apparition, and be stricken dead.  He pretended to have seen a bustard (I
suspect him to have been familiar with the dodo), in manner following: He
was out upon the plain at the close of a late autumn day, when he dimly
discerned, going on before him at a curious fitfully bounding pace, what
he at first supposed to be a gig-umbrella that had been blown from some
conveyance, but what he presently believed to be a lean dwarf man upon a
little pony.  Having followed this object for some distance without
gaining on it, and having called to it many times without receiving any
answer, he pursued it for miles and miles, when, at length coming up with
it, he discovered it to be the last bustard in Great Britain, degenerated
into a wingless state, and running along the ground.  Resolved to capture
him or perish in the attempt, he closed with the bustard; but the
bustard, who had formed a counter-resolution that he should do neither,
threw him, stunned him, and was last seen making off due west.  This
weird main, at that stage of metempsychosis, may have been a sleep-walker
or an enthusiast or a robber; but I awoke one night to find him in the
dark at my bedside, repeating the Athanasian Creed in a terrific voice.  I
paid my bill next day, and retired from the county with all possible
precipitation.

That was not a commonplace story which worked itself out at a little Inn
in Switzerland, while I was staying there.  It was a very homely place,
in a village of one narrow zigzag street, among mountains, and you went
in at the main door through the cow-house, and among the mules and the
dogs and the fowls, before ascending a great bare staircase to the rooms;
which were all of unpainted wood, without plastering or papering,--like
rough packing-cases.  Outside there was nothing but the straggling
street, a little toy church with a copper-coloured steeple, a pine
forest, a torrent, mists, and mountain-sides.  A young man belonging to
this Inn had disappeared eight weeks before (it was winter-time), and was
supposed to have had some undiscovered love affair, and to have gone for
a soldier.  He had got up in the night, and dropped into the village
street from the loft in which he slept with another man; and he had done
it so quietly, that his companion and fellow-labourer had heard no
movement when he was awakened in the morning, and they said, "Louis,
where is Henri?"  They looked for him high and low, in vain, and gave him
up.  Now, outside this Inn, there stood, as there stood outside every
dwelling in the village, a stack of firewood; but the stack belonging to
the Inn was higher than any of the rest, because the Inn was the richest
house, and burnt the most fuel.  It began to be noticed, while they were
looking high and low, that a Bantam cock, part of the live stock of the
Inn, put himself wonderfully out of his way to get to the top of this
wood-stack; and that he would stay there for hours and hours, crowing,
until he appeared in danger of splitting himself.  Five weeks went
on,--six weeks,--and still this terrible Bantam, neglecting his domestic
affairs, was always on the top of the wood-stack, crowing the very eyes
out of his head.  By this time it was perceived that Louis had become
inspired with a violent animosity towards the terrible Bantam, and one
morning he was seen by a woman, who sat nursing her goitre at a little
window in a gleam of sun, to catch up a rough billet of wood, with a
great oath, hurl it at the terrible Bantam crowing on the wood-stack, and
bring him down dead.  Hereupon the woman, with a sudden light in her
mind, stole round to the back of the wood-stack, and, being a good
climber, as all those women are, climbed up, and soon was seen upon the
summit, screaming, looking down the hollow within, and crying, "Seize
Louis, the murderer!  Ring the church bell!  Here is the body!"  I saw
the murderer that day, and I saw him as I sat by my fire at the Holly-
Tree Inn, and I see him now, lying shackled with cords on the stable
litter, among the mild eyes and the smoking breath of the cows, waiting
to be taken away by the police, and stared at by the fearful village.  A
heavy animal,--the dullest animal in the stables,--with a stupid head,
and a lumpish face devoid of any trace of insensibility, who had been,
within the knowledge of the murdered youth, an embezzler of certain small
moneys belonging to his master, and who had taken this hopeful mode of
putting a possible accuser out of his way.  All of which he confessed
next day, like a sulky wretch who couldn't be troubled any more, now that
they had got hold of him, and meant to make an end of him.  I saw him
once again, on the day of my departure from the Inn.  In that Canton the
headsman still does his office with a sword; and I came upon this
murderer sitting bound, to a chair, with his eyes bandaged, on a scaffold
in a little market-place.  In that instant, a great sword (loaded with
quicksilver in the thick part of the blade) swept round him like a gust
of wind or fire, and there was no such creature in the world.  My wonder
was, not that he was so suddenly dispatched, but that any head was left
unreaped, within a radius of fifty yards of that tremendous sickle.

That was a good Inn, too, with the kind, cheerful landlady and the honest
landlord, where I lived in the shadow of Mont Blanc, and where one of the
apartments has a zoological papering on the walls, not so accurately
joined but that the elephant occasionally rejoices in a tiger's hind legs
and tail, while the lion puts on a trunk and tusks, and the bear,
moulting as it were, appears as to portions of himself like a leopard.  I
made several American friends at that Inn, who all called Mont Blanc
Mount Blank,--except one good-humoured gentleman, of a very sociable
nature, who became on such intimate terms with it that he spoke of it
familiarly as "Blank;" observing, at breakfast, "Blank looks pretty tall
this morning;" or considerably doubting in the courtyard in the evening,
whether there warn't some go-ahead naters in our country, sir, that would
make out the top of Blank in a couple of hours from first start--now!

Once I passed a fortnight at an Inn in the North of England, where I was
haunted by the ghost of a tremendous pie.  It was a Yorkshire pie, like a
fort,--an abandoned fort with nothing in it; but the waiter had a fixed
idea that it was a point of ceremony at every meal to put the pie on the
table.  After some days I tried to hint, in several delicate ways, that I
considered the pie done with; as, for example, by emptying fag-ends of
glasses of wine into it; putting cheese-plates and spoons into it, as
into a basket; putting wine-bottles into it, as into a cooler; but always
in vain, the pie being invariably cleaned out again and brought up as
before.  At last, beginning to be doubtful whether I was not the victim
of a spectral illusion, and whether my health and spirits might not sink
under the horrors of an imaginary pie, I cut a triangle out of it, fully
as large as the musical instrument of that name in a powerful orchestra.
Human provision could not have foreseen the result--but the waiter mended
the pie.  With some effectual species of cement, he adroitly fitted the
triangle in again, and I paid my reckoning and fled.

The Holly-Tree was getting rather dismal.  I made an overland expedition
beyond the screen, and penetrated as far as the fourth window.  Here I
was driven back by stress of weather.  Arrived at my winter-quarters once
more, I made up the fire, and took another Inn.

It was in the remotest part of Cornwall.  A great annual Miners' Feast
was being holden at the Inn, when I and my travelling companions
presented ourselves at night among the wild crowd that were dancing
before it by torchlight.  We had had a break-down in the dark, on a stony
morass some miles away; and I had the honour of leading one of the
unharnessed post-horses.  If any lady or gentleman, on perusal of the
present lines, will take any very tall post-horse with his traces hanging
about his legs, and will conduct him by the bearing-rein into the heart
of a country dance of a hundred and fifty couples, that lady or gentleman
will then, and only then, form an adequate idea of the extent to which
that post-horse will tread on his conductor's toes.  Over and above
which, the post-horse, finding three hundred people whirling about him,
will probably rear, and also lash out with his hind legs, in a manner
incompatible with dignity or self-respect on his conductor's part.  With
such little drawbacks on my usually impressive aspect, I appeared at this
Cornish Inn, to the unutterable wonder of the Cornish Miners.  It was
full, and twenty times full, and nobody could be received but the post-
horse,--though to get rid of that noble animal was something.  While my
fellow-travellers and I were discussing how to pass the night and so much
of the next day as must intervene before the jovial blacksmith and the
jovial wheelwright would be in a condition to go out on the morass and
mend the coach, an honest man stepped forth from the crowd and proposed
his unlet floor of two rooms, with supper of eggs and bacon, ale and
punch.  We joyfully accompanied him home to the strangest of clean
houses, where we were well entertained to the satisfaction of all
parties.  But the novel feature of the entertainment was, that our host
was a chair-maker, and that the chairs assigned to us were mere frames,
altogether without bottoms of any sort; so that we passed the evening on
perches.  Nor was this the absurdest consequence; for when we unbent at
supper, and any one of us gave way to laughter, he forgot the peculiarity
of his position, and instantly disappeared.  I myself, doubled up into an
attitude from which self-extrication was impossible, was taken out of my
