
For the rest, as time goes on, I more and more feel as if Mr. Morris's
long later poems, "The Earthly Paradise" especially, were less art than
"art manufacture."  This may be an ungrateful and erroneous sentiment.
"The Earthly Paradise," and still more certainly "Jason," are full of
such pleasure as only poetry can give.  As some one said of a
contemporary politician, they are "good, but copious."  Even from
narrative poetry Mr. Morris has long abstained.  He, too, illustrates Mr.
Matthew Arnold's parable of "The Progress of Poetry."

   "The Mount is mute, the channel dry."

Euripides has been called "the meteoric poet," and the same title seems
very appropriate to Mr. Swinburne.  Probably few readers had heard his
name--I only knew it as that of the author of a strange mediaeval tale in
prose--when he published "Atalanta in Calydon" in 1865.  I remember
taking up the quarto in white cloth, at the Oxford Union, and being
instantly led captive by the beauty and originality of the verse.

There was this novel "meteoric" character in the poem: the writer seemed
to rejoice in snow and fire, and stars, and storm, "the blue cold fields
and folds of air," in all the primitive forces which were alive before
this earth was; the naked vast powers that circle the planets and
farthest constellations.  This quality, and his varied and sonorous
verse, and his pessimism, put into the mouth of a Greek chorus, were the
things that struck one most in Mr. Swinburne.  He was, above all, "a
mighty-mouthed inventer of harmonies," and one looked eagerly for his
next poems.  They came with disappointment and trouble.

The famous "Poems and Ballads" have become so well known that people can
hardly understand the noise they made.  I don't wonder at the scandal,
even now.  I don't see the fun of several of the pieces, except the
mischievous fun of shocking your audience.  However, "The Leper" and his
company are chiefly boyish, in the least favourable sense of the word.
They do not destroy the imperishable merit of the "Hymn to Proserpine"
and the "Garden of Proserpine" and the "Triumph of Time" and "Itylus."

Many years have passed since 1866, and yet one's old opinion, that
English poetry contains no verbal music more original, sonorous, and
sweet than Mr. Swinburne wrote in these pieces when still very young,
remains an opinion unshaken.  Twenty years ago, then, he had enabled the
world to take his measure; he had given proofs of a true poet; he was
learned too in literature as few poets have been since Milton, and, like
Milton, skilled to make verse in the languages of the ancient world and
in modern tongues.  His French songs and Greek elegiacs are of great
excellence; probably no scholar who was not also a poet could match his
Greek lines on Landor.

What, then, is lacking to make Mr. Swinburne a poet of a rank even higher
than that which he occupies?  Who can tell?  There is no science that can
master this chemistry of the brain.  He is too copious.  "Bothwell" is
long enough for six plays, and "Tristram of Lyonesse" is prolix beyond
even mediaeval narrative.  He is too pertinacious; children are the joy
of the world and Victor Hugo is a great poet; but Mr. Swinburne almost
makes us excuse Herod and Napoleon III. by his endless odes to Hugo, and
rondels to small boys and girls.  _Ne quid nimis_, that is the golden
rule which he constantly spurns, being too luxuriant, too emphatic, and
as fond of repeating himself as Professor Freeman.  Such are the defects
of so noble a genius; thus perverse Nature has decided that it shall be,
Nature which makes no ruby without a flaw.

The name of Mr. Robert Bridges is probably strange to many lovers of
poetry who would like nothing better than to make acquaintance with his
verse.  But his verse is not so easily found.  This poet never writes in
magazines; his books have not appealed to the public by any sort of
advertisement, only two or three of them have come forth in the regular
way.  The first was "Poems, by Robert Bridges, Batchelor of Arts in the
University of Oxford.  _Parva seges satis est_.  London: Pickering,
1873."

This volume was presently, I fancy, withdrawn, and the author has
distributed some portions of it in succeeding pamphlets, or in books
printed at Mr. Daniel's private press in Oxford.  In these, as in all Mr.
Bridges's poems, there is a certain austere and indifferent beauty of
diction and a memory of the old English poets, Milton and the earlier
lyrists.  I remember being greatly pleased with the "Elegy on a Lady whom
Grief for the Death of Her Betrothed Killed."

   "Let the priests go before, arrayed in white,
      And let the dark-stoled minstrels follow slow
   Next they that bear her, honoured on this night,
      And then the maidens in a double row,
      Each singing soft and low,
   And each on high a torch upstaying:
   Unto her lover lead her forth with light,
   With music and with singing, and with praying."

This is a stately stanza.

In his first volume Mr. Bridges offered a few rondeaux and triolets,
turning his back on all these things as soon as they became popular.  In
spite of their popularity I have the audacity to like them still, in
their humble twittering way.  Much more in his true vein were the lines,
"Clear and Gentle Stream," and all the other verses in which, like a true
Etonian, he celebrates the beautiful Thames:

   "There is a hill beside the silver Thames,
      Shady with birch and beech and odorous pine,
   And brilliant under foot with thousand gems
      Steeply the thickets to his floods decline.
         Straight trees in every place
         Their thick tops interlace,
      And pendent branches trail their foliage fine
         Upon his watery face.

   * * * * *

   A reedy island guards the sacred bower
      And hides it from the meadow, where in peace
   The lazy cows wrench many a scented flower,
      Robbing the golden market of the bees.
         And laden branches float
         By banks of myosote;
      And scented flag and golden fleur-de-lys
         Delay the loitering boat."

I cannot say how often I have read that poem, and how delightfully it
carries the breath of our River through the London smoke.  Nor less
welcome are the two poems on spring, the "Invitation to the Country," and
the "Reply."  In these, besides their verbal beauty and their charming
pictures, is a manly philosophy of Life, which animates Mr. Bridges's
more important pieces--his "Prometheus the Firebringer," and his "Nero,"
a tragedy remarkable for the representation of Nero himself, the
luxurious human tiger.  From "Prometheus" I make a short extract, to show
the quality of Mr. Bridges's blank verse:

   "Nor is there any spirit on earth astir,
   Nor 'neath the airy vault, nor yet beyond
   In any dweller in far-reaching space
   Nobler or dearer than the spirit of man:
   That spirit which lives in each and will not die,
   That wooeth beauty, and for all good things
   Urgeth a voice, or still in passion sigheth,
   And where he loveth, draweth the heart with him."

Mr. Bridges's latest book is his "Eros and Psyche" (Bell & Sons, who
publish the "Prometheus").  It is the old story very closely followed,
and beautifully retold, with a hundred memories of ancient poets: Homer,
Dante, Theocritus, as well as of Apuleius.

I have named Mr. Bridges here because his poems are probably all but
unknown to readers well acquainted with many other English writers of
late days.  On them, especially on actual contemporaries or juniors in
age, it would be almost impertinent for me to speak to you; but, even at
that risk, I take the chance of directing you to the poetry of Mr.
Bridges.  I owe so much pleasure to its delicate air, that, if speech be
impertinence, silence were ingratitude. {2}




FIELDING


_To Mrs. Goodhart, in the Upper Mississippi Valley_.

Dear Madam,--Many thanks for the New York newspaper you have kindly sent
me, with the statistics of book-buying in the Upper Mississippi Valley.
Those are interesting particulars which tell one so much about the taste
of a community.

So the Rev. E. P. Roe is your favourite novelist there; a thousand of his
books are sold for every two copies of the works of Henry Fielding?  This
appears to me to speak but oddly for taste in the Upper Mississippi
Valley.  On Mr. Roe's works I have no criticism to pass, for I have not
read them carefully.

But I do think your neighbours lose a great deal by neglecting Henry
Fielding.  You will tell me he is coarse (which I cannot deny); you will
remind me of what Dr. Johnson said, rebuking Mrs. Hannah More.  "I never
saw Johnson really angry with me but once," writes that sainted maiden
lady.  "I alluded to some witty passage in 'Tom Jones.'"  He replied: "I
am shocked to hear you quote from so vicious a book.  I am sorry to hear
you have read it; a confession which no modest lady should ever make."

You remind me of this, and that Johnson was no prude, and that his age
was tolerant.  You add that the literary taste of the Upper Mississippi
Valley is much more pure than the waters of her majestic river, and that
you only wish you knew who the two culprits were that bought books of
Fielding's.

Ah, madam, how shall I answer you?  Remember that if you have Johnson on
your side, on mine I have Mrs. More herself, a character purer than "the
consecrated snow that lies on Dian's lap."  Again, we cannot believe
Johnson was fair to Fielding, who had made his friend, the author of
"Pamela," very uncomfortable by his jests.  Johnson owned that he read
all "Amelia" at one sitting.  Could so worthy a man have been so absorbed
by an unworthy book?

Once more, I am not recommending Fielding to boys and girls.  "Tom Jones"
was one of the works that Lydia Languish hid under the sofa; even Miss
Languish did not care to be caught with that humorous foundling.
"Fielding was the last of our writers who drew a man," Mr. Thackeray
said, "and he certainly did not study from a draped model."

For these reasons, and because his language is often unpolished, and
because his morality (that he is always preaching) is not for "those that
eddy round and round," I do not desire to see Fielding popular among Miss
Alcott's readers.  But no man who cares for books can neglect him, and
many women are quite manly enough, have good sense and good taste enough,
