d'Argent, for they've turned a deaf ear to the coucous. Tiens, tiens!
seems to me I know that lady for an old customer."

"You've often started empty, and arrived full," said his porter, still
by way of consolation.

"But no parcels! Twenty good Gods! What a fate!"

And Pierrotin sat down on one of the huge stone posts which protected
the walls of the building from the wheels of the coaches; but he did so
with an anxious, reflective air that was not habitual with him.

This conversation, apparently insignificant, had stirred up cruel
anxieties which were slumbering in his breast. What could there be to
trouble the heart of Pierrotin in a fine new coach? To shine upon
"the road," to rival the Touchards, to magnify his own line, to carry
passengers who would compliment him on the conveniences due to the
progress of coach-building, instead of having to listen to perpetual
complaints of his "sabots" (tires of enormous width),--such was
Pierrotin's laudable ambition; but, carried away with the desire to
outstrip his comrade on the line, hoping that the latter might some day
retire and leave to him alone the transportation to Isle-Adam, he had
gone too far. The coach was indeed ordered from Barry, Breilmann, and
Company, coach-builders, who had just substituted square English
springs for those called "swan-necks," and other old-fashioned French
contrivances. But these hard and distrustful manufacturers would only
deliver over the diligence in return for coin. Not particularly pleased
to build a vehicle which would be difficult to sell if it remained upon
their hands, these long-headed dealers declined to undertake it at all
until Pierrotin had made a preliminary payment of two thousand francs.
To satisfy this precautionary demand, Pierrotin had exhausted all his
resources and all his credit. His wife, his father-in-law, and his
friends had bled. This superb diligence he had been to see the evening
before at the painter's; all it needed now was to be set a-rolling, but
to make it roll, payment in full must, alas! be made.

Now, a thousand francs were lacking to Pierrotin, and where to get them
he did not know. He was in debt to the master of the Lion d'Argent; he
was in danger of his losing his two thousand francs already paid to the
coach-builder, not counting five hundred for the mate to Rougeot, and
three hundred for new harnesses, on which he had a three-months' credit.
Driven by the fury of despair and the madness of vanity, he had just
openly declared that the new coach was to start on the morrow. By
offering fifteen hundred francs, instead of the two thousand five
hundred still due, he was in hopes that the softened carriage-builders
would give him his coach. But after a few moments' meditation, his
feelings led him to cry out aloud:--

"No! they're dogs! harpies! Suppose I appeal to Monsieur Moreau, the
steward at Presles? he is such a kind man," thought Pierrotin, struck
with a new idea. "Perhaps he would take my note for six months."

At this moment a footman in livery, carrying a leather portmanteau and
coming from the Touchard establishment, where he had gone too late to
secure places as far as Chambly, came up and said:--

"Are you Pierrotin?"

"Say on," replied Pierrotin.

"If you would wait a quarter of an hour, you could take my master.
If not, I'll carry back the portmanteau and try to find some other
conveyance."

"I'll wait two, three quarters, and throw a little in besides, my lad,"
said Pierrotin, eyeing the pretty leather trunk, well buckled, and
bearing a brass plate with a coat of arms.

"Very good; then take this," said the valet, ridding his shoulder of the
trunk, which Pierrotin lifted, weighed, and examined.

"Here," he said to his porter, "wrap it up carefully in soft hay and put
it in the boot. There's no name upon it," he added.

"Monseigneur's arms are there," replied the valet.

"Monseigneur! Come and take a glass," said Pierrotin, nodding toward
the Cafe de l'Echiquier, whither he conducted the valet. "Waiter, two
absinthes!" he said, as he entered. "Who is your master? and where is
he going? I have never seen you before," said Pierrotin to the valet as
they touched glasses.

"There's a good reason for that," said the footman. "My master only
goes into your parts about once a year, and then in his own carriage. He
prefers the valley d'Orge, where he has the most beautiful park in the
neighborhood of Paris, a perfect Versailles, a family estate of which he
bears the name. Don't you know Monsieur Moreau?"

"The steward of Presles?"

"Yes. Monsieur le Comte is going down to spend a couple of days with
him."

"Ha! then I'm to carry Monsieur le Comte de Serizy!" cried the
coach-proprietor.

"Yes, my land, neither more nor less. But listen! here's a special
order. If you have any of the country neighbors in your coach you are
not to call him Monsieur le comte; he wants to travel 'en cognito,' and
told me to be sure to say he would pay a handsome pourboire if he was
not recognized."

"So! Has this secret journey anything to do with the affair which Pere
Leger, the farmer at the Moulineaux, came to Paris the other day to
settle?"

"I don't know," replied the valet, "but the fat's in the fire. Last
night I was sent to the stable to order the Daumont carriage to be ready
to go to Presles at seven this morning. But when seven o'clock came,
Monsieur le comte countermanded it. Augustin, his valet de chambre,
attributes the change to the visit of a lady who called last night, and
again this morning,--he thought she came from the country."

"Could she have told him anything against Monsieur Moreau?--the best of
men, the most honest of men, a king of men, hey! He might have made a
deal more than he has out of his position, if he'd chosen; I can tell
you that."

"Then he was foolish," answered the valet, sententiously.

"Is Monsieur le Serizy going to live at Presles at last?" asked
Pierrotin; "for you know they have just repaired and refurnished the
chateau. Do you think it is true he has already spent two hundred
thousand francs upon it?"

"If you or I had half what he has spent upon it, you and I would be rich
bourgeois. If Madame la comtesse goes there--ha! I tell you what! no
more ease and comfort for the Moreaus," said the valet, with an air of
mystery.

"He's a worthy man, Monsieur Moreau," remarked Pierrotin, thinking of
the thousand francs he wanted to get from the steward. "He is a man who
makes others work, but he doesn't cheapen what they do; and he gets all
he can out of the land--for his master. Honest man! He often comes to
Paris and gives me a good fee: he has lots of errands for me to do in
Paris; sometimes three or four packages a day,--either from monsieur or
madame. My bill for cartage alone comes to fifty francs a month, more or
less. If madame does set up to be somebody, she's fond of her children;
and it is I who fetch them from school and take them back; and each time
she gives me five francs,--a real great lady couldn't do better than
that. And every time I have any one in the coach belonging to them or
going to see them, I'm allowed to drive up to the chateau,--that's all
right, isn't it?"

"They say Monsieur Moreau wasn't worth three thousand francs when
Monsieur le comte made him steward of Presles," said the valet.

"Well, since 1806, there's seventeen years, and the man ought to have
made something at any rate."

"True," said the valet, nodding. "Anyway, masters are very annoying; and
I hope, for Moreau's sake, that he has made butter for his bread."

"I have often been to your house in the rue de la Chaussee d'Antin
to carry baskets of game," said Pierrotin, "but I've never had the
advantage, so far of seeing either monsieur or madame."

"Monsieur le comte is a good man," said the footman, confidentially.
"But if he insists on your helping to keep up his cognito there's
something in the wind. At any rate, so we think at the house; or else,
why should he countermand the Daumont,--why travel in a coucou? A peer
of France might afford to hire a cabriolet to himself, one would think."

"A cabriolet would cost him forty francs to go there and back; for
let me tell you, if you don't know it, that road was only made for
squirrels,--up-hill and down, down-hill and up!" said Pierrotin. "Peer
of France or bourgeois, they are all looking after the main chance, and
saving their money. If this journey concerns Monsieur Moreau, faith, I'd
be sorry any harm should come to him! Twenty good Gods! hadn't I better
find some way of warning him?--for he's a truly good man, a kind man, a
king of men, hey!"

"Pooh! Monsieur le comte thinks everything of Monsieur Moreau," replied
the valet. "But let me give you a bit of good advice. Every man for
himself in this world. We have enough to do to take care of ourselves.
Do what Monsieur le comte asks you to do, and all the more because
there's no trifling with him. Besides, to tell the truth, the count is
generous. If you oblige him so far," said the valet, pointing half-way
down his little finger, "he'll send you on as far as that," stretching
out his arm to its full length.

This wise reflection, and the action that enforced it, had the effect,
coming from a man who stood as high as second valet to the Comte de
Serizy, of cooling the ardor of Pierrotin for the steward of Presles.

"Well, adieu, Monsieur Pierrotin," said the valet.

A glance rapidly cast on the life of the Comte de Serizy, and on that of
his steward, is here necessary in order to fully understand the little
drama now about to take place in Pierrotin's vehicle.




CHAPTER II. THE STEWARD IN DANGER


Monsieur Huguet de Serisy descends in a direct line from the famous
president Huguet, ennobled under Francois I.

