rose in her, there was great confusion.  In the midst of it, Captain
Maryon was heard hailing from the beach.  He had been carried down in his
hammock, and looked very bad; but he insisted on being stood there on his
feet; and I saw him, myself, come off in the boat, sitting upright in the
stern-sheets, as if nothing was wrong with him.

A quick sort of council was held, and Captain Maryon soon resolved that
we must all fall to work to get the cargo out, and that when that was
done, the guns and heavy matters must be got out, and that the sloop must
be hauled ashore, and careened, and the leak stopped.  We were all
mustered (the Pirate-Chace party volunteering), and told off into
parties, with so many hours of spell and so many hours of relief, and we
all went at it with a will.  Christian George King was entered one of the
party in which I worked, at his own request, and he went at it with as
good a will as any of the rest.  He went at it with so much heartiness,
to say the truth, that he rose in my good opinion almost as fast as the
water rose in the ship.  Which was fast enough, and faster.

Mr. Commissioner Pordage kept in a red-and-black japanned box, like a
family lump-sugar box, some document or other, which some Sambo chief or
other had got drunk and spilt some ink over (as well as I could
understand the matter), and by that means had given up lawful possession
of the Island.  Through having hold of this box, Mr. Pordage got his
title of Commissioner.  He was styled Consul too, and spoke of himself as
"Government."

He was a stiff-jointed, high-nosed old gentleman, without an ounce of fat
on him, of a very angry temper and a very yellow complexion.  Mrs.
Commissioner Pordage, making allowance for difference of sex, was much
the same.  Mr. Kitten, a small, youngish, bald, botanical and
mineralogical gentleman, also connected with the mine--but everybody
there was that, more or less--was sometimes called by Mr. Commissioner
Pordage, his Vice-commissioner, and sometimes his Deputy-consul.  Or
sometimes he spoke of Mr. Kitten, merely as being "under Government."

The beach was beginning to be a lively scene with the preparations for
careening the sloop, and with cargo, and spars, and rigging, and water-
casks, dotted about it, and with temporary quarters for the men rising up
there out of such sails and odds and ends as could be best set on one
side to make them, when Mr. Commissioner Pordage comes down in a high
fluster, and asks for Captain Maryon.  The Captain, ill as he was, was
slung in his hammock betwixt two trees, that he might direct; and he
raised his head, and answered for himself.

"Captain Maryon," cries Mr. Commissioner Pordage, "this is not official.
This is not regular."

"Sir," says the Captain, "it hath been arranged with the clerk and
supercargo, that you should be communicated with, and requested to render
any little assistance that may lie in your power.  I am quite certain
that hath been duly done."

"Captain Maryon," replied Mr. Commissioner Pordage, "there hath been no
written correspondence.  No documents have passed, no memoranda have been
made, no minutes have been made, no entries and counter-entries appear in
the official muniments.  This is indecent.  I call upon you, sir, to
desist, until all is regular, or Government will take this up."

"Sir," says Captain Maryon, chafing a little, as he looked out of his
hammock; "between the chances of Government taking this up, and my ship
taking herself down, I much prefer to trust myself to the former."

"You do, sir?" cries Mr. Commissioner Pordage.

"I do, sir," says Captain Maryon, lying down again.

"Then, Mr. Kitten," says the Commissioner, "send up instantly for my
Diplomatic coat."

He was dressed in a linen suit at that moment; but, Mr. Kitten started
off himself and brought down the Diplomatic coat, which was a blue cloth
one, gold-laced, and with a crown on the button.

"Now, Mr. Kitten," says Pordage, "I instruct you, as Vice-commissioner,
and Deputy-consul of this place, to demand of Captain Maryon, of the
sloop Christopher Columbus, whether he drives me to the act of putting
this coat on?"

"Mr. Pordage," says Captain Maryon, looking out of his hammock again, "as
I can hear what you say, I can answer it without troubling the gentleman.
I should be sorry that you should be at the pains of putting on too hot a
coat on my account; but, otherwise, you may put it on hind-side before,
or inside-out, or with your legs in the sleeves, or your head in the
skirts, for any objection that I have to offer to your thoroughly
pleasing yourself."

"Very good, Captain Maryon," says Pordage, in a tremendous passion.  "Very
good, sir.  Be the consequences on your own head!  Mr. Kitten, as it has
come to this, help me on with it."

When he had given that order, he walked off in the coat, and all our
names were taken, and I was afterwards told that Mr. Kitten wrote from
his dictation more than a bushel of large paper on the subject, which
cost more before it was done with, than ever could be calculated, and
which only got done with after all, by being lost.

Our work went on merrily, nevertheless, and the Christopher Columbus,
hauled up, lay helpless on her side like a great fish out of water.  While
she was in that state, there was a feast, or a ball, or an entertainment,
or more properly all three together, given us in honour of the ship, and
the ship's company, and the other visitors.  At that assembly, I believe,
I saw all the inhabitants then upon the Island, without any exception.  I
took no particular notice of more than a few, but I found it very
agreeable in that little corner of the world to see the children, who
were of all ages, and mostly very pretty--as they mostly are.  There was
one handsome elderly lady, with very dark eyes and gray hair, that I
inquired about.  I was told that her name was Mrs. Venning; and her
married daughter, a fair slight thing, was pointed out to me by the name
of Fanny Fisher.  Quite a child she looked, with a little copy of herself
holding to her dress; and her husband, just come back from the mine,
exceeding proud of her.  They were a good-looking set of people on the
whole, but I didn't like them.  I was out of sorts; in conversation with
Charker, I found fault with all of them.  I said of Mrs. Venning, she was
proud; of Mrs. Fisher, she was a delicate little baby-fool.  What did I
think of this one?  Why, he was a fine gentleman.  What did I say to that
one?  Why, she was a fine lady.  What could you expect them to be (I
asked Charker), nursed in that climate, with the tropical night shining
for them, musical instruments playing to them, great trees bending over
them, soft lamps lighting them, fire-flies sparkling in among them,
bright flowers and birds brought into existence to please their eyes,
delicious drinks to be had for the pouring out, delicious fruits to be
got for the picking, and every one dancing and murmuring happily in the
scented air, with the sea breaking low on the reef for a pleasant chorus.

"Fine gentlemen and fine ladies, Harry?" I says to Charker.  "Yes, I
think so!  Dolls!  Dolls!  Not the sort of stuff for wear, that comes of
poor private soldiering in the Royal Marines!"

However, I could not gainsay that they were very hospitable people, and
that they treated us uncommonly well.  Every man of us was at the
entertainment, and Mrs. Belltott had more partners than she could dance
with: though she danced all night, too.  As to Jack (whether of the
Christopher Columbus, or of the Pirate pursuit party, it made no
difference), he danced with his brother Jack, danced with himself, danced
with the moon, the stars, the trees, the prospect, anything.  I didn't
greatly take to the chief-officer of that party, with his bright eyes,
brown face, and easy figure.  I didn't much like his way when he first
happened to come where we were, with Miss Maryon on his arm.  "O, Captain
Carton," she says, "here are two friends of mine!"  He says, "Indeed?
These two Marines?"--meaning Charker and self.  "Yes," says she, "I
showed these two friends of mine when they first came, all the wonders of
Silver-Store."  He gave us a laughing look, and says he, "You are in
luck, men.  I would be disrated and go before the mast to-morrow, to be
shown the way upward again by such a guide.  You are in luck, men."  When
we had saluted, and he and the lady had waltzed away, I said, "You are a
pretty follow, too, to talk of luck.  You may go to the Devil!"

Mr. Commissioner Pordage and Mrs. Commissioner, showed among the company
on that occasion like the King and Queen of a much Greater Britain than
Great Britain.  Only two other circumstances in that jovial night made
much separate impression on me.  One was this.  A man in our draft of
marines, named Tom Packer, a wild unsteady young fellow, but the son of a
respectable shipwright in Portsmouth Yard, and a good scholar who had
been well brought up, comes to me after a spell of dancing, and takes me
aside by the elbow, and says, swearing angrily:

"Gill Davis, I hope I may not be the death of Sergeant Drooce one day!"

Now, I knew Drooce had always borne particularly hard on this man, and I
knew this man to be of a very hot temper: so, I said:

"Tut, nonsense! don't talk so to me!  If there's a man in the corps who
scorns the name of an assassin, that man and Tom Packer are one."

Tom wipes his head, being in a mortal sweat, and says he:

"I hope so, but I can't answer for myself when he lords it over me, as he
has just now done, before a woman.  I tell you what, Gill!  Mark my
words!  It will go hard with Sergeant Drooce, if ever we are in an
engagement together, and he has to look to me to save him.  Let him say a
prayer then, if he knows one, for it's all over with him, and he is on
his Death-bed.  Mark my words!"

I did mark his words, and very soon afterwards, too, as will shortly be
taken down.

The other circumstance that I noticed at that ball, was, the gaiety and
attachment of Christian George King.  The innocent spirits that Sambo
Pilot was in, and the impossibility he found himself under of showing all
the little colony, but especially the ladies and children, how fond he
was of them, how devoted to them, and how faithful to them for life and
death, for present, future, and everlasting, made a great impression on
me.  If ever a man, Sambo or no Sambo, was trustful and trusted, to what
may be called quite an infantine and sweetly beautiful extent, surely, I
thought that morning when I did at last lie down to rest, it was that
Sambo Pilot, Christian George King.

This may account for my dreaming of him.  He stuck in my sleep,
cornerwise, and I couldn't get him out.  He was always flitting about me,
dancing round me, and peeping in over my hammock, though I woke and dozed
off again fifty times.  At last, when I opened my eyes, there he really
was, looking in at the open side of the little dark hut; which was made
of leaves, and had Charker's hammock slung in it as well as mine.

"So-Jeer!" says he, in a sort of a low croak.  "Yup!"

"Hallo!" says I, starting up.  "What?  You _are_ there, are you?"

"Iss," says he.  "Christian George King got news."

