"If my head can't take care of itself by this time, after all the
knocking about the world it has had," replied the captain, as
unconcernedly as if he had no connection with it, "it's not worth looking
after."

Thus they came into the young fisherman's bedroom, which was as perfectly
neat and clean as the shop and parlour below; though it was but a little
place, with a sliding window, and a phrenological ceiling expressive of
all the peculiarities of the house-roof.  Here the captain sat down on
the foot of the bed, and glancing at a dreadful libel on Kitty which
ornamented the wall,--the production of some wandering limner, whom the
captain secretly admired as having studied portraiture from the figure-
heads of ships,--motioned to the young man to take the rush-chair on the
other side of the small round table.  That done, the captain put his hand
in the deep breast-pocket of his long-skirted blue coat, and took out of
it a strong square case-bottle,--not a large bottle, but such as may be
seen in any ordinary ship's medicine-chest.  Setting this bottle on the
table without removing his hand from it, Captain Jorgan then spake as
follows:--

"In my last voyage homeward-bound," said the captain, "and that's the
voyage off of which I now come straight, I encountered such weather off
the Horn as is not very often met with, even there.  I have rounded that
stormy Cape pretty often, and I believe I first beat about there in the
identical storms that blew the Devil's horns and tail off, and led to the
horns being worked up into tooth-picks for the plantation overseers in my
country, who may be seen (if you travel down South, or away West, fur
enough) picking their teeth with 'em, while the whips, made of the tail,
flog hard.  In this last voyage, homeward-bound for Liverpool from South
America, I say to you, my young friend, it blew.  Whole measures!  No
half measures, nor making believe to blow; it blew!  Now I warn't blown
clean out of the water into the sky,--though I expected to be even
that,--but I was blown clean out of my course; and when at last it fell
calm, it fell dead calm, and a strong current set one way, day and night,
night and day, and I drifted--drifted--drifted--out of all the ordinary
tracks and courses of ships, and drifted yet, and yet drifted.  It
behooves a man who takes charge of fellow-critturs' lives, never to rest
from making himself master of his calling.  I never did rest, and
consequently I knew pretty well ('specially looking over the side in the
dead calm of that strong current) what dangers to expect, and what
precautions to take against 'em.  In short, we were driving head on to an
island.  There was no island in the chart, and, therefore, you may say it
was ill-manners in the island to be there; I don't dispute its bad
breeding, but there it was.  Thanks be to Heaven, I was as ready for the
island as the island was ready for me.  I made it out myself from the
masthead, and I got enough way upon her in good time to keep her off.  I
ordered a boat to be lowered and manned, and went in that boat myself to
explore the island.  There was a reef outside it, and, floating in a
corner of the smooth water within the reef, was a heap of sea-weed, and
entangled in that sea-weed was this bottle."

Here the captain took his hand from the bottle for a moment, that the
young fisherman might direct a wondering glance at it; and then replaced
his band and went on:--

"If ever you come--or even if ever you don't come--to a desert place, use
you your eyes and your spy-glass well; for the smallest thing you see may
prove of use to you; and may have some information or some warning in it.
That's the principle on which I came to see this bottle.  I picked up the
bottle and ran the boat alongside the island, and made fast and went
ashore armed, with a part of my boat's crew.  We found that every scrap
of vegetation on the island (I give it you as my opinion, but scant and
scrubby at the best of times) had been consumed by fire.  As we were
making our way, cautiously and toilsomely, over the pulverised embers,
one of my people sank into the earth breast-high.  He turned pale, and
'Haul me out smart, shipmates,' says he, 'for my feet are among bones.'
We soon got him on his legs again, and then we dug up the spot, and we
found that the man was right, and that his feet had been among bones.
More than that, they were human bones; though whether the remains of one
man, or of two or three men, what with calcination and ashes, and what
with a poor practical knowledge of anatomy, I can't undertake to say.  We
examined the whole island and made out nothing else, save and except
that, from its opposite side, I sighted a considerable tract of land,
which land I was able to identify, and according to the bearings of which
(not to trouble you with my log) I took a fresh departure.  When I got
aboard again I opened the bottle, which was oilskin-covered as you see,
and glass-stoppered as you see.  Inside of it," pursued the captain,
suiting his action to his words, "I found this little crumpled, folded
paper, just as you see.  Outside of it was written, as you see, these
words: 'Whoever finds this, is solemnly entreated by the dead to convey
it unread to Alfred Raybrock, Steepways, North Devon, England.'  A sacred
charge," said the captain, concluding his narrative, "and, Alfred
Raybrock, there it is!"

"This is my poor brother's writing!"

"I suppose so," said Captain Jorgan.  "I'll take a look out of this
little window while you read it."

"Pray no, sir!  I should be hurt.  My brother couldn't know it would fall
into such hands as yours."

The captain sat down again on the foot of the bed, and the young man
opened the folded paper with a trembling hand, and spread it on the
table.  The ragged paper, evidently creased and torn both before and
after being written on, was much blotted and stained, and the ink had
faded and run, and many words were wanting.  What the captain and the
young fisherman made out together, after much re-reading and much
humouring of the folds of the paper, is given on the next page.

The young fisherman had become more and more agitated, as the writing had
become clearer to him.  He now left it lying before the captain, over
whose shoulder he had been reading it, and dropping into his former seat,
leaned forward on the table and laid his face in his hands.

"What, man," urged the captain, "don't give in!  Be up and doing _like_ a
man!"

"It is selfish, I know,--but doing what, doing what?" cried the young
fisherman, in complete despair, and stamping his sea-boot on the ground.

"Doing what?" returned the captain.  "Something!  I'd go down to the
little breakwater below yonder, and take a wrench at one of the
salt-rusted iron rings there, and either wrench it up by the roots or
wrench my teeth out of my head, sooner than I'd do nothing.  Nothing!"
ejaculated the captain.  "Any fool or fainting heart can do _that_, and
nothing can come of nothing,--which was pretended to be found out, I
believe, by one of them Latin critters," said the captain with the
deepest disdain; "as if Adam hadn't found it out, afore ever he so much
as named the beasts!"

Yet the captain saw, in spite of his bold words, that there was some
greater reason than he yet understood for the young man's distress.  And
he eyed him with a sympathising curiosity.

"Come, come!" continued the captain, "Speak out.  What is it, boy!"

"You have seen how beautiful she is, sir," said the young man, looking up
for the moment, with a flushed face and rumpled hair.

"Did any man ever say she warn't beautiful?" retorted the captain.  "If
so, go and lick him."

The young man laughed fretfully in spite of himself, and said--

"It's not that, it's not that."

"Wa'al, then, what is it?" said the captain in a more soothing tone.

The young fisherman mournfully composed himself to tell the captain what
it was, and began: "We were to have been married next Monday week--"

"Were to have been!" interrupted Captain Jorgan.  "And are to be?  Hey?"

Young Raybrock shook his head, and traced out with his fore-finger the
words, "_poor father's five hundred pounds_," in the written paper.

"Go along," said the captain.  "Five hundred pounds?  Yes?"

"That sum of money," pursued the young fisherman, entering with the
greatest earnestness on his demonstration, while the captain eyed him
with equal earnestness, "was all my late father possessed.  When he died,
he owed no man more than he left means to pay, but he had been able to
lay by only five hundred pounds."

"Five hundred pounds," repeated the captain.  "Yes?"

"In his lifetime, years before, he had expressly laid the money aside to
leave to my mother,--like to settle upon her, if I make myself
understood."

"Yes?"

"He had risked it once--my father put down in writing at that time,
respecting the money--and was resolved never to risk it again."

"Not a spectator," said the captain.  "My country wouldn't have suited
him.  Yes?"

"My mother has never touched the money till now.  And now it was to have
been laid out, this very next week, in buying me a handsome share in our
neighbouring fishery here, to settle me in life with Kitty."

The captain's face fell, and he passed and repassed his sun-browned right
hand over his thin hair, in a discomfited manner.

"Kitty's father has no more than enough to live on, even in the sparing
way in which we live about here.  He is a kind of bailiff or steward of
manor rights here, and they are not much, and it is but a poor little
office.  He was better off once, and Kitty must never marry to mere
drudgery and hard living."

The captain still sat stroking his thin hair, and looking at the young
fisherman.

"I am as certain that my father had no knowledge that any one was wronged
as to this money, or that any restitution ought to be made, as I am
certain that the sun now shines.  But, after this solemn warning from my
brother's grave in the sea, that the money is Stolen Money," said Young
Raybrock, forcing himself to the utterance of the words, "can I doubt it?
Can I touch it?"

"About not doubting, I ain't so sure," observed the captain; "but about
not touching--no--I don't think you can."

"See then," said Young Raybrock, "why I am so grieved.  Think of Kitty.
Think what I have got to tell her!"

His heart quite failed him again when he had come round to that, and he
once more beat his sea-boot softly on the floor.  But not for long; he
