very pretty young thing and delicate, and it seemed too rough for her to
be out at all though she had only come from the Adelphi Hotel which would
not have been much above a quarter of a mile if the weather had been less
severe.  Now it did so happen my dear that I had been forced to put five
shillings weekly additional on the second in consequence of a loss from
running away full dressed as if going out to a dinner-party, which was
very artful and had made me rather suspicious taking it along with
Parliament, so when the gentleman proposed three months certain and the
money in advance and leave then reserved to renew on the same terms for
six months more, I says I was not quite certain but that I might have
engaged myself to another party but would step down-stairs and look into
it if they would take a seat.  They took a seat and I went down to the
handle of the Major's door that I had already began to consult finding it
a great blessing, and I knew by his whistling in a whisper that he was
varnishing his boots which was generally considered private, however he
kindly calls out "If it's you, Madam, come in," and I went in and told
him.

"Well, Madam," says the Major rubbing his nose--as I did fear at the
moment with the black sponge but it was only his knuckle, he being always
neat and dexterous with his fingers--"well, Madam, I suppose you would be
glad of the money?"

I was delicate of saying "Yes" too out, for a little extra colour rose
into the Major's cheeks and there was irregularity which I will not
particularly specify in a quarter which I will not name.

"I am of opinion, Madam," says the Major, "that when money is ready for
you--when it is ready for you, Mrs. Lirriper--you ought to take it.  What
is there against it, Madam, in this case up-stairs?"

"I really cannot say there is anything against it, sir, still I thought I
would consult you."

"You said a newly-married couple, I think, Madam?" says the Major.

I says "Ye-es.  Evidently.  And indeed the young lady mentioned to me in
a casual way that she had not been married many months."

The Major rubbed his nose again and stirred the varnish round and round
in its little saucer with his piece of sponge and took to his whistling
in a whisper for a few moments.  Then he says "You would call it a Good
Let, Madam?"

"O certainly a Good Let sir."

"Say they renew for the additional six months.  Would it put you about
very much Madam if--if the worst was to come to the worst?" said the
Major.

"Well I hardly know," I says to the Major.  "It depends upon
circumstances.  Would _you_ object Sir for instance?"

"I?" says the Major.  "Object?  Jemmy Jackman?  Mrs. Lirriper close with
the proposal."

So I went up-stairs and accepted, and they came in next day which was
Saturday and the Major was so good as to draw up a Memorandum of an
agreement in a beautiful round hand and expressions that sounded to me
equally legal and military, and Mr. Edson signed it on the Monday morning
and the Major called upon Mr. Edson on the Tuesday and Mr. Edson called
upon the Major on the Wednesday and the Second and the parlours were as
friendly as could be wished.

The three months paid for had run out and we had got without any fresh
overtures as to payment into May my dear, when there came an obligation
upon Mr. Edson to go a business expedition right across the Isle of Man,
which fell quite unexpected upon that pretty little thing and is not a
place that according to my views is particularly in the way to anywhere
at any time but that may be a matter of opinion.  So short a notice was
it that he was to go next day, and dreadfully she cried poor pretty, and
I am sure I cried too when I saw her on the cold pavement in the sharp
east wind--it being a very backward spring that year--taking a last leave
of him with her pretty bright hair blowing this way and that and her arms
clinging round his neck and him saying "There there there.  Now let me go
Peggy."  And by that time it was plain that what the Major had been so
accommodating as to say he would not object to happening in the house,
would happen in it, and I told her as much when he was gone while I
comforted her with my arm up the staircase, for I says "You will soon
have others to keep up for my pretty and you must think of that."

His letter never came when it ought to have come and what she went
through morning after morning when the postman brought none for her the
very postman himself compassionated when she ran down to the door, and
yet we cannot wonder at its being calculated to blunt the feelings to
have all the trouble of other people's letters and none of the pleasure
and doing it oftener in the mud and mizzle than not and at a rate of
wages more resembling Little Britain than Great.  But at last one morning
when she was too poorly to come running down-stairs he says to me with a
pleased look in his face that made me next to love the man in his uniform
coat though he was dripping wet "I have taken you first in the street
this morning Mrs. Lirriper, for here's the one for Mrs. Edson."  I went
up to her bedroom with it as fast as ever I could go, and she sat up in
bed when she saw it and kissed it and tore it open and then a blank stare
came upon her.  "It's very short!" she says lifting her large eyes to my
face.  "O Mrs. Lirriper it's very short!"  I says "My dear Mrs. Edson no
doubt that's because your husband hadn't time to write more just at that
time."  "No doubt, no doubt," says she, and puts her two hands on her
face and turns round in her bed.

I shut her softly in and I crept down-stairs and I tapped at the Major's
door, and when the Major having his thin slices of bacon in his own Dutch
oven saw me he came out of his chair and put me down on the sofa.  "Hush!"
says he, "I see something's the matter.  Don't speak--take time."  I says
"O Major I'm afraid there's cruel work up-stairs."  "Yes yes" says he "I
had begun to be afraid of it--take time."  And then in opposition to his
own words he rages out frightfully, and says "I shall never forgive
myself Madam, that I, Jemmy Jackman, didn't see it all that
morning--didn't go straight up-stairs when my boot-sponge was in my
hand--didn't force it down his throat--and choke him dead with it on the
spot!"

The Major and me agreed when we came to ourselves that just at present we
could do no more than take on to suspect nothing and use our best
endeavours to keep that poor young creature quiet, and what I ever should
have done without the Major when it got about among the organ-men that
quiet was our object is unknown, for he made lion and tiger war upon them
to that degree that without seeing it I could not have believed it was in
any gentleman to have such a power of bursting out with fire-irons
walking-sticks water-jugs coals potatoes off his table the very hat off
his head, and at the same time so furious in foreign languages that they
would stand with their handles half-turned fixed like the Sleeping
Ugly--for I cannot say Beauty.

Ever to see the postman come near the house now gave me such I fear that
it was a reprieve when he went by, but in about another ten days or a
fortnight he says again, "Here's one for Mrs. Edson.--Is she pretty
well?"  "She is pretty well postman, but not well enough to rise so early
as she used" which was so far gospel-truth.

I carried the letter in to the Major at his breakfast and I says
tottering "Major I have not the courage to take it up to her."

"It's an ill-looking villain of a letter," says the Major.

"I have not the courage Major" I says again in a tremble "to take it up
to her."

After seeming lost in consideration for some moments the Major says,
raising his head as if something new and useful had occurred to his mind
"Mrs. Lirriper, I shall never forgive myself that I, Jemmy Jackman,
didn't go straight up-stairs that morning when my boot-sponge was in my
hand--and force it down his throat--and choke him dead with it."

"Major" I says a little hasty "you didn't do it which is a blessing, for
it would have done no good and I think your sponge was better employed on
your own honourable boots."

So we got to be rational, and planned that I should tap at her bedroom
door and lay the letter on the mat outside and wait on the upper landing
for what might happen, and never was gunpowder cannon-balls or shells or
rockets more dreaded than that dreadful letter was by me as I took it to
the second floor.

A terrible loud scream sounded through the house the minute after she had
opened it, and I found her on the floor lying as if her life was gone.  My
dear I never looked at the face of the letter which was lying, open by
her, for there was no occasion.

Everything I needed to bring her round the Major brought up with his own
hands, besides running out to the chemist's for what was not in the house
and likewise having the fiercest of all his many skirmishes with a
musical instrument representing a ball-room I do not know in what
particular country and company waltzing in and out at folding-doors with
rolling eyes.  When after a long time I saw her coming to, I slipped on
the landing till I heard her cry, and then I went in and says cheerily
"Mrs. Edson you're not well my dear and it's not to be wondered at," as
if I had not been in before.  Whether she believed or disbelieved I
cannot say and it would signify nothing if I could, but I stayed by her
for hours and then she God ever blesses me! and says she will try to rest
for her head is bad.

"Major," I whispers, looking in at the parlours, "I beg and pray of you
don't go out."

The Major whispers, "Madam, trust me I will do no such a thing.  How is
she?"

I says "Major the good Lord above us only knows what burns and rages in
her poor mind.  I left her sitting at her window.  I am going to sit at
mine."

It came on afternoon and it came on evening.  Norfolk is a delightful
street to lodge in--provided you don't go lower down--but of a summer
evening when the dust and waste paper lie in it and stray children play
in it and a kind of a gritty calm and bake settles on it and a peal of
church-bells is practising in the neighbourhood it is a trifle dull, and
never have I seen it since at such a time and never shall I see it
evermore at such a time without seeing the dull June evening when that
forlorn young creature sat at her open corner window on the second and me
at my open corner window (the other corner) on the third.  Something
merciful, something wiser and better far than my own self, had moved me
while it was yet light to sit in my bonnet and shawl, and as the shadows
fell and the tide rose I could sometimes--when I put out my head and
looked at her window below--see that she leaned out a little looking down
the street.  It was just settling dark when I saw _her_ in the street.

So fearful of losing sight of her that it almost stops my breath while I
tell it, I went down-stairs faster than I ever moved in all my life and
only tapped with my hand at the Major's door in passing it and slipping
