
"Yes," she said; "are you not my hope? You are a gentleman, and I
confide to you my honor. Besides," she added, looking at him with
dignity, "I am so unhappy that you would never betray my trust. But what
is the good of all this? Go, let me die, sooner than that you should
enter that house of Maitre Cornelius. Do you not know that all his
apprentices--"

"Have been hanged," said the young man, laughing.

"Oh, don't go; you will be made the victim of some sorcery."

"I cannot pay too dearly for the joy of serving you," he said, with a
look that made her drop her eyes.

"But my husband?" she said.

"Here is something to put him to sleep," replied her lover, drawing from
his belt a little vial.

"Not for always?" said the countess, trembling.

For all answer the young seigneur made a gesture of horror.

"I would long ago have defied him to mortal combat if he were not so
old," he said. "God preserve me from ridding you of him in any other
way."

"Forgive me," said the countess, blushing. "I am cruelly punished for my
sins. In a moment of despair I thought of killing him, and I feared you
might have the same desire. My sorrow is great that I have never
yet been able to confess that wicked thought; but I fear it would
be repeated to him and he would avenge it. I have shamed you," she
continued, distressed by his silence, "I deserve your blame."

And she broke the vial by flinging it on the floor violently.

"Do not come," she said, "my husband sleeps lightly; my duty is to wait
for the help of Heaven--that will I do!"

She tried to leave the chapel.

"Ah!" cried the young man, "order me to do so and I will kill him. You
will see me to-night."

"I was wise to destroy that drug," she said in a voice that was faint
with the pleasure of finding herself so loved. "The fear of awakening my
husband will save us from ourselves."

"I pledge you my life," said the young man, pressing her hand.

"If the king is willing, the pope can annul my marriage. We will then be
united," she said, giving him a look that was full of delightful hopes.

"Monseigneur comes!" cried the page, rushing in.

Instantly the young nobleman, surprised at the short time he had gained
with his mistress and wondering at the celerity of the count, snatched a
kiss, which was not refused.

"To-night!" he said, slipping hastily from the chapel.

Thanks to the darkness, he reached the great portal safely, gliding from
column to column in the long shadows which they cast athwart the nave.
An old canon suddenly issued from the confessional, came to the side
of the countess and closed the iron railing before which the page was
marching gravely up and down with the air of a watchman.

A strong light now announced the coming of the count. Accompanied by
several friends and by servants bearing torches, he hurried forward, a
naked sword in hand. His gloomy eyes seemed to pierce the shadows and to
rake even the darkest corners of the cathedral.

"Monseigneur, madame is there," said the page, going forward to meet
him.

The Comte de Saint-Vallier found his wife kneeling on the steps of the
alter, the old priest standing beside her and reading his breviary. At
that sight the count shook the iron railing violently as if to give vent
to his rage.

"What do you want here, with a drawn sword in a church?" asked the
priest.

"Father, that is my husband," said the countess.

The priest took a key from his sleeve, and unlocked the railed door of
the chapel. The count, almost in spite of himself, cast a look into the
confessional, then he entered the chapel, and seemed to be listening
attentively to the sounds in the cathedral.

"Monsieur," said his wife, "you owe many thanks to this venerable canon,
who gave me a refuge here."

The count turned pale with anger; he dared not look at his friends, who
had come there more to laugh at him than to help him. Then he answered
curtly:

"Thank God, father, I shall find some way to repay you."

He took his wife by the arm and, without allowing her to finish her
curtsey to the canon, he signed to his servants and left the church
without a word to the others who had accompanied him. His silence had
something savage and sullen about it. Impatient to reach his home and
preoccupied in searching for means to discover the truth, he took
his way through the tortuous streets which at that time separated the
cathedral from the Chancellerie, a fine building recently erected by the
Chancellor Juvenal des Ursins, on the site of an old fortification given
by Charles VII. to that faithful servant as a reward for his glorious
labors.

The count reached at last the rue du Murier, in which his dwelling,
called the hotel de Poitiers, was situated. When his escort of servants
had entered the courtyard and the heavy gates were closed, a deep
silence fell on the narrow street, where other great seigneurs had their
houses, for this new quarter of the town was near to Plessis, the usual
residence of the king, to whom the courtiers, if sent for, could go in a
moment. The last house in this street was also the last in the town. It
belonged to Maitre Cornelius Hoogworst, an old Brabantian merchant,
to whom King Louis XI. gave his utmost confidence in those financial
transactions which his crafty policy induced him to undertake outside of
his own kingdom.

Observing the outline of the houses occupied respectively by Maitre
Cornelius and by the Comte de Poitiers, it was easy to believe that
the same architect had built them both and destined them for the use of
tyrants. Each was sinister in aspect, resembling a small fortress, and
both could be well defended against an angry populace. Their corners
were upheld by towers like those which lovers of antiquities remark
in towns where the hammer of the iconoclast has not yet prevailed. The
bays, which had little depth, gave a great power of resistance to the
iron shutters of the windows and doors. The riots and the civil wars so
frequent in those tumultuous times were ample justification for these
precautions.

As six o'clock was striking from the great tower of the Abbey
Saint-Martin, the lover of the hapless countess passed in front of the
hotel de Poitiers and paused for a moment to listen to the sounds
made in the lower hall by the servants of the count, who were supping.
Casting a glance at the window of the room where he supposed his love to
be, he continued his way to the adjoining house. All along his way, the
young man had heard the joyous uproar of many feasts given throughout
the town in honor of the day. The ill-joined shutters sent out streaks
of light, the chimneys smoked, and the comforting odor of roasted meats
pervaded the town. After the conclusion of the church services, the
inhabitants were regaling themselves, with murmurs of satisfaction which
fancy can picture better than words can paint. But at this particular
spot a deep silence reigned, because in these two houses lived two
passions which never rejoiced. Beyond them stretched the silent country.
Beneath the shadow of the steeples of Saint-Martin, these two mute
dwellings, separated from the others in the same street and standing
at the crooked end of it, seemed afflicted with leprosy. The building
opposite to them, the home of the criminals of the State, was also under
a ban. A young man would be readily impressed by this sudden contrast.
About to fling himself into an enterprise that was horribly hazardous,
it is no wonder that the daring young seigneur stopped short before the
house of the silversmith, and called to mind the many tales furnished by
the life of Maitre Cornelius,--tales which caused such singular horror
to the countess. At this period a man of war, and even a lover, trembled
at the mere word "magic." Few indeed were the minds and the imaginations
which disbelieved in occult facts and tales of the marvellous. The lover
of the Comtesse de Saint-Vallier, one of the daughters whom Louis XI.
had in Dauphine by Madame de Sassenage, however bold he might be in
other respects, was likely to think twice before he finally entered the
house of a so-called sorcerer.

The history of Maitre Cornelius Hoogworst will fully explain the
security which the silversmith inspired in the Comte de Saint-Vallier,
the terror of the countess, and the hesitation that now took possession
of the lover. But, in order to make the readers of this nineteenth
century understand how such commonplace events could be turned into
anything supernatural, and to make them share the alarms of that olden
time, it is necessary to interrupt the course of this narrative and cast
a rapid glance on the preceding life and adventures of Maitre Cornelius.




CHAPTER II. THE TORCONNIER


Cornelius Hoogworst, one of the richest merchants in Ghent, having drawn
upon himself the enmity of Charles, Duke of Burgundy, found refuge
and protection at the court of Louis XI. The king was conscious of the
advantages he could gain from a man connected with all the principal
commercial houses of Flanders, Venice, and the Levant; he naturalized,
ennobled, and flattered Maitre Cornelius; all of which was rarely done
by Louis XI. The monarch pleased the Fleming as much as the Fleming
pleased the monarch. Wily, distrustful, and miserly; equally politic,
equally learned; superior, both of them, to their epoch; understanding
each other marvellously; they discarded and resumed with equal facility,
the one his conscience, the other his religion; they loved the same
Virgin, one by conviction, the other by policy; in short, if we may
believe the jealous tales of Olivier de Daim and Tristan, the king went
to the house of the Fleming for those diversions with which King
Louis XI. diverted himself. History has taken care to transmit to our
knowledge the licentious tastes of a monarch who was not averse to
debauchery. The old Fleming found, no doubt, both pleasure and profit in
lending himself to the capricious pleasures of his royal client.

