with an almost mocking regret of the days when all her happiness was to
work beside her mother in the tapestried salon, to pray in the church,
to sing her ballads to a lute, to read in secret a romance of chivalry,
to pluck the petals of a flower, discover what gift her father would
make her on the feast of the Blessed Saint-John, and find out the
meaning of speeches repressed before her. Passing thus from her childish
joys through the sixteen years of her girlhood, the grace of those
softly flowing years when she knew no pain was eclipsed by the
brightness of a memory precious though ill-fated. The joyous peace
of her childhood was far less sweet to her than a single one of the
troubles scattered upon the last two years of her childhood,--years that
were rich in treasures now buried forever in her heart.

The vision brought her suddenly to that morning, that ravishing morning,
when in the grand old parlor panelled and carved in oak, which served
the family as a dining-room, she saw her handsome cousin for the first
time. Alarmed by the seditions in Paris, her mother's family had sent
the young courtier to Rouen, hoping that he could there be trained to
the duties of the magistracy by his uncle, whose office might some day
devolve upon him. The countess smiled involuntarily as she remembered
the haste with which she retired on seeing this relation whom she did
not know. But, in spite of the rapidity with which she opened and
shut the door, a single glance had put into her soul so vigorous an
impression of the scene that even at this moment she seemed to see it
still occurring. Her eye again wandered from the violet velvet mantle
embroidered with gold and lined with satin to the spurs on the boots,
the pretty lozenges slashed into the doublet, the trunk-hose, and the
rich collaret which gave to view a throat as white as the lace around
it. She stroked with her hand the handsome face with its tiny pointed
moustache, and "royale" as small as the ermine tips upon her father's
hood.

In the silence of the night, with her eyes fixed on the green silk
curtains which she no longer saw, the countess, forgetting the storm,
her husband, and her fears, recalled the days which seemed to her
longer than years, so full were they,--days when she loved, and was
beloved!--and the moment when, fearing her mother's sternness, she
had slipped one morning into her father's study to whisper her girlish
confidences on his knee, waiting for his smile at her caresses to say
in his ear, "Will you scold me if I tell you something?" Once more she
heard her father say, after a few questions in reply to which she spoke
for the first time of her love, "Well, well, my child, we will think
of it. If he studies well, if he fits himself to succeed me, if he
continues to please you, I will be on your side."

After that she had listened no longer; she had kissed her father, and,
knocking over his papers as she ran from the room, she flew to the great
linden-tree where, daily, before her formidable mother rose, she met
that charming cousin, Georges de Chaverny.

Faithfully the youth promised to study law and customs. He laid aside
the splendid trappings of the nobility of the sword to wear the sterner
costume of the magistracy.

"I like you better in black," she said.

It was a falsehood, but by that falsehood she comforted her lover for
having thrown his dagger to the winds. The memory of the little schemes
employed to deceive her mother, whose severity seemed great, brought
back to her the soulful joys of that innocent and mutual and sanctioned
love; sometimes a rendezvous beneath the linden, where speech could
be freer than before witnesses; sometimes a furtive clasp, or a stolen
kiss,--in short, all the naive instalments of a passion that did not
pass the bounds of modesty. Reliving in her vision those delightful days
when she seemed to have too much happiness, she fancied that she kissed,
in the void, that fine young face with the glowing eyes, that rosy
mouth that spoke so well of love. Yes, she had loved Chaverny, poor
apparently; but what treasures had she not discovered in that soul as
tender as it was strong!

Suddenly her father died. Chaverny did not succeed him. The flames
of civil war burst forth. By Chaverny's care she and her mother found
refuge in a little town of Lower Normandy. Soon the deaths of other
relatives made her one of the richest heiresses in France. Happiness
disappeared as wealth came to her. The savage and terrible face of Comte
d'Herouville, who asked her hand, rose before her like a thunder-cloud,
spreading its gloom over the smiling meadows so lately gilded by the
sun. The poor countess strove to cast from her memory the scenes of
weeping and despair brought about by her long resistance.

At last came an awful night when her mother, pale and dying, threw
herself at her daughter's feet. Jeanne could save Chaverny's life by
yielding; she yielded. It was night. The count, arriving bloody from
the battlefield was there; all was ready, the priest, the altar, the
torches! Jeanne belonged henceforth to misery. Scarcely had she time to
say to her young cousin who was set at liberty:--

"Georges, if you love me, never see me again!"

She heard the departing steps of her lover, whom, in truth, she never
saw again; but in the depths of her heart she still kept sacred his last
look which returned perpetually in her dreams and illumined them. Living
like a cat shut into a lion's cage, the young wife dreaded at all hours
the claws of the master which ever threatened her. She knew that in
order to be happy she must forget the past and think only of the future;
but there were days, consecrated to the memory of some vanished joy,
when she deliberately made it a crime to put on the gown she had worn on
the day she had seen her lover for the first time.

"I am not guilty," she said, "but if I seem guilty to the count it is as
if I were so. Perhaps I am! The Holy Virgin conceived without--"

She stopped. During this moment when her thoughts were misty and her
soul floated in a region of fantasy her naivete made her attribute to
that last look with which her lover transfixed her the occult power of
the visitation of the angel to the Mother of her Lord. This supposition,
worthy of the days of innocence to which her reverie had carried her
back, vanished before the memory of a conjugal scene more odious than
death. The poor countess could have no real doubt as to the legitimacy
of the child that stirred in her womb. The night of her marriage
reappeared to her in all the horror if its agony, bringing in its train
other such nights and sadder days.

"Ah! my poor Chaverny!" she cried, weeping, "you so respectful, so
gracious, YOU were always kind to me."

She turned her eyes to her husband as if to persuade herself that that
harsh face contained a promise of mercy, dearly brought. The count was
awake. His yellow eyes, clear as those of a tiger, glittered beneath
their tufted eyebrows and never had his glance been so incisive. The
countess, terrified at having encountered it, slid back under the great
counterpane and was motionless.

"Why are you weeping?" said the count, pulling away the covering which
hid his wife.

That voice, always a terror to her, had a specious softness at this
moment which seemed to her of good augury.

"I suffer much," she answered.

"Well, my pretty one, it is no crime to suffer; why did you tremble when
I looked at you? Alas! what must I do to be loved?" The wrinkles of his
forehead between the eyebrows deepened. "I see plainly you are afraid of
me," he added, sighing.

Prompted by the instinct of feeble natures the countess interrupted the
count by moans, exclaiming:--

"I fear a miscarriage! I clambered over the rocks last evening and tired
myself."

Hearing those words, the count cast so horribly suspicious a look upon
his wife, that she reddened and shuddered. He mistook the fear of the
innocent creature for remorse.

"Perhaps it is the beginning of a regular childbirth," he said.

"What then?" she said.

"In any case, I must have a proper man here," he said. "I will fetch
one."

The gloomy look which accompanied these words overcame the countess,
who fell back in the bed with a moan, caused more by a sense of her fate
than by the agony of the coming crisis; that moan convinced the count of
the justice of the suspicions that were rising in his mind. Affecting
a calmness which the tones of his voice, his gestures, and looks
contradicted, he rose hastily, wrapped himself in a dressing-gown which
lay on a chair, and began by locking a door near the chimney through
which the state bedroom was entered from the reception rooms which
communicated with the great staircase.

Seeing her husband pocket that key, the countess had a presentiment of
danger. She next heard him open the door opposite to that which he had
just locked and enter a room where the counts of Herouville slept when
they did not honor their wives with their noble company. The countess
knew of that room only by hearsay. Jealousy kept her husband always with
her. If occasionally some military expedition forced him to leave her,
the count left more than one Argus, whose incessant spying proved his
shameful distrust.

In spite of the attention the countess now gave to the slightest noise,
she heard nothing more. The count had, in fact, entered a long gallery
leading from his room which continued down the western wing of the
castle. Cardinal d'Herouville, his great-uncle, a passionate lover of
the works of printing, had there collected a library as interesting for
the number as for the beauty of its volumes, and prudence had caused
him to build into the walls one of those curious inventions suggested by
solitude or by monastic fears. A silver chain set in motion, by means of
invisible wires, a bell placed at the bed's head of a faithful servitor.
The count now pulled the chain, and the boots and spurs of the man on
duty sounded on the stone steps of a spiral staircase, placed in the
tall tower which flanked the western corner of the chateau on the ocean
side.

When the count heard the steps of his retainer he pulled back the rusty
bolts which protected the door leading from the gallery to the tower,
admitting into the sanctuary of learning a man of arms whose stalwart
appearance was in keeping with that of his master. This man, scarcely
awakened, seemed to have walked there by instinct; the horn lantern
which he held in his hand threw so feeble a gleam down the long library
that his master and he appeared in that visible darkness like two
phantoms.

"Saddle my war-horse instantly, and come with me yourself."

This order was given in a deep tone which roused the man's intelligence.
He raised his eyes to those of his master and encountered so piercing a
look that the effect was that of an electric shock.
