can't afford to have you laid up for a single hour; and I respectfully
and earnestly beg of you to go below."  The end of it was, that I agreed
to do so, on the understanding that if I failed to come up of my own
accord within three hours, I was to be punctually called.  Having settled
that, I left John in charge.  But I called him to me once afterwards, to
ask him a question.  I had been to look at the barometer, and had seen
the mercury still perfectly steady, and had come up the companion again
to take a last look about me--if I can use such a word in reference to
such darkness--when I thought that the waves, as the Golden Mary parted
them and shook them off, had a hollow sound in them; something that I
fancied was a rather unusual reverberation.  I was standing by the
quarter-deck rail on the starboard side, when I called John aft to me,
and bade him listen.  He did so with the greatest attention.  Turning to
me he then said, "Rely upon it, Captain Ravender, you have been without
rest too long, and the novelty is only in the state of your sense of
hearing."  I thought so too by that time, and I think so now, though I
can never know for absolute certain in this world, whether it was or not.

When I left John Steadiman in charge, the ship was still going at a great
rate through the water.  The wind still blew right astern.  Though she
was making great way, she was under shortened sail, and had no more than
she could easily carry.  All was snug, and nothing complained.  There was
a pretty sea running, but not a very high sea neither, nor at all a
confused one.

I turned in, as we seamen say, all standing.  The meaning of that is, I
did not pull my clothes off--no, not even so much as my coat: though I
did my shoes, for my feet were badly swelled with the deck.  There was a
little swing-lamp alight in my cabin.  I thought, as I looked at it
before shutting my eyes, that I was so tired of darkness, and troubled by
darkness, that I could have gone to sleep best in the midst of a million
of flaming gas-lights.  That was the last thought I had before I went
off, except the prevailing thought that I should not be able to get to
sleep at all.

I dreamed that I was back at Penrith again, and was trying to get round
the church, which had altered its shape very much since I last saw it,
and was cloven all down the middle of the steeple in a most singular
manner.  Why I wanted to get round the church I don't know; but I was as
anxious to do it as if my life depended on it.  Indeed, I believe it did
in the dream.  For all that, I could not get round the church.  I was
still trying, when I came against it with a violent shock, and was flung
out of my cot against the ship's side.  Shrieks and a terrific outcry
struck me far harder than the bruising timbers, and amidst sounds of
grinding and crashing, and a heavy rushing and breaking of water--sounds
I understood too well--I made my way on deck.  It was not an easy thing
to do, for the ship heeled over frightfully, and was beating in a furious
manner.

I could not see the men as I went forward, but I could hear that they
were hauling in sail, in disorder.  I had my trumpet in my hand, and,
after directing and encouraging them in this till it was done, I hailed
first John Steadiman, and then my second mate, Mr. William Rames.  Both
answered clearly and steadily.  Now, I had practised them and all my
crew, as I have ever made it a custom to practise all who sail with me,
to take certain stations and wait my orders, in case of any unexpected
crisis.  When my voice was heard hailing, and their voices were heard
answering, I was aware, through all the noises of the ship and sea, and
all the crying of the passengers below, that there was a pause.  "Are you
ready, Rames?"--"Ay, ay, sir!"--"Then light up, for God's sake!"  In a
moment he and another were burning blue-lights, and the ship and all on
board seemed to be enclosed in a mist of light, under a great black dome.

The light shone up so high that I could see the huge Iceberg upon which
we had struck, cloven at the top and down the middle, exactly like
Penrith Church in my dream.  At the same moment I could see the watch
last relieved, crowding up and down on deck; I could see Mrs. Atherfield
and Miss Coleshaw thrown about on the top of the companion as they
struggled to bring the child up from below; I could see that the masts
were going with the shock and the beating of the ship; I could see the
frightful breach stove in on the starboard side, half the length of the
vessel, and the sheathing and timbers spirting up; I could see that the
Cutter was disabled, in a wreck of broken fragments; and I could see
every eye turned upon me.  It is my belief that if there had been ten
thousand eyes there, I should have seen them all, with their different
looks.  And all this in a moment.  But you must consider what a moment.

I saw the men, as they looked at me, fall towards their appointed
stations, like good men and true.  If she had not righted, they could
have done very little there or anywhere but die--not that it is little
for a man to die at his post--I mean they could have done nothing to save
the passengers and themselves.  Happily, however, the violence of the
shock with which we had so determinedly borne down direct on that fatal
Iceberg, as if it had been our destination instead of our destruction,
had so smashed and pounded the ship that she got off in this same instant
and righted.  I did not want the carpenter to tell me she was filling and
going down; I could see and hear that.  I gave Rames the word to lower
the Long-boat and the Surf-boat, and I myself told off the men for each
duty.  Not one hung back, or came before the other.  I now whispered to
John Steadiman, "John, I stand at the gangway here, to see every soul on
board safe over the side.  You shall have the next post of honour, and
shall be the last but one to leave the ship.  Bring up the passengers,
and range them behind me; and put what provision and water you can got
at, in the boats.  Cast your eye for'ard, John, and you'll see you have
not a moment to lose."

My noble fellows got the boats over the side as orderly as I ever saw
boats lowered with any sea running, and, when they were launched, two or
three of the nearest men in them as they held on, rising and falling with
the swell, called out, looking up at me, "Captain Ravender, if anything
goes wrong with us, and you are saved, remember we stood by you!"--"We'll
all stand by one another ashore, yet, please God, my lads!" says I.  "Hold
on bravely, and be tender with the women."

The women were an example to us.  They trembled very much, but they were
quiet and perfectly collected.  "Kiss me, Captain Ravender," says Mrs.
Atherfield, "and God in heaven bless you, you good man!"  "My dear," says
I, "those words are better for me than a life-boat."  I held her child in
my arms till she was in the boat, and then kissed the child and handed
her safe down.  I now said to the people in her, "You have got your
freight, my lads, all but me, and I am not coming yet awhile.  Pull away
from the ship, and keep off!"

That was the Long-boat.  Old Mr. Rarx was one of her complement, and he
was the only passenger who had greatly misbehaved since the ship struck.
Others had been a little wild, which was not to be wondered at, and not
very blamable; but, he had made a lamentation and uproar which it was
dangerous for the people to hear, as there is always contagion in
weakness and selfishness.  His incessant cry had been that he must not be
separated from the child, that he couldn't see the child, and that he and
the child must go together.  He had even tried to wrest the child out of
my arms, that he might keep her in his.  "Mr. Rarx," said I to him when
it came to that, "I have a loaded pistol in my pocket; and if you don't
stand out of the gangway, and keep perfectly quiet, I shall shoot you
through the heart, if you have got one."  Says he, "You won't do murder,
Captain Ravender!"   "No, sir," says I, "I won't murder forty-four people
to humour you, but I'll shoot you to save them."  After that he was
quiet, and stood shivering a little way off, until I named him to go over
the side.

The Long-boat being cast off, the Surf-boat was soon filled.  There only
remained aboard the Golden Mary, John Mullion the man who had kept on
burning the blue-lights (and who had lighted every new one at every old
one before it went out, as quietly as if he had been at an illumination);
John Steadiman; and myself.  I hurried those two into the Surf-boat,
called to them to keep off, and waited with a grateful and relieved heart
for the Long-boat to come and take me in, if she could.  I looked at my
watch, and it showed me, by the blue-light, ten minutes past two.  They
lost no time.  As soon as she was near enough, I swung myself into her,
and called to the men, "With a will, lads!  She's reeling!"  We were not
an inch too far out of the inner vortex of her going down, when, by the
blue-light which John Mullion still burnt in the bow of the Surf-boat, we
saw her lurch, and plunge to the bottom head-foremost.  The child cried,
weeping wildly, "O the dear Golden Mary!  O look at her!  Save her!  Save
the poor Golden Mary!"  And then the light burnt out, and the black dome
seemed to come down upon us.

I suppose if we had all stood a-top of a mountain, and seen the whole
remainder of the world sink away from under us, we could hardly have felt
more shocked and solitary than we did when we knew we were alone on the
wide ocean, and that the beautiful ship in which most of us had been
securely asleep within half an hour was gone for ever.  There was an
awful silence in our boat, and such a kind of palsy on the rowers and the
man at the rudder, that I felt they were scarcely keeping her before the
sea.  I spoke out then, and said, "Let every one here thank the Lord for
our preservation!"  All the voices answered (even the child's), "We thank
the Lord!"  I then said the Lord's Prayer, and all hands said it after me
with a solemn murmuring.  Then I gave the word "Cheerily, O men,
Cheerily!" and I felt that they were handling the boat again as a boat
ought to be handled.

The Surf-boat now burnt another blue-light to show us where they were,
and we made for her, and laid ourselves as nearly alongside of her as we
dared.  I had always kept my boats with a coil or two of good stout stuff
in each of them, so both boats had a rope at hand.  We made a shift, with
much labour and trouble, to get near enough to one another to divide the
blue-lights (they were no use after that night, for the sea-water soon
got at them), and to get a tow-rope out between us.  All night long we
kept together, sometimes obliged to cast off the rope, and sometimes
getting it out again, and all of us wearying for the morning--which
appeared so long in coming that old Mr. Rarx screamed out, in spite of
his fears of me, "The world is drawing to an end, and the sun will never
rise any more!"

When the day broke, I found that we were all huddled together in a
miserable manner.  We were deep in the water; being, as I found on
mustering, thirty-one in number, or at least six too many.  In the Surf-
boat they were fourteen in number, being at least four too many.  The
first thing I did, was to get myself passed to the rudder--which I took
from that time--and to get Mrs. Atherfield, her child, and Miss Coleshaw,
passed on to sit next me.  As to old Mr. Rarx, I put him in the bow, as
far from us as I could.  And I put some of the best men near us in order
that if I should drop there might be a skilful hand ready to take the
helm.

The sea moderating as the sun came up, though the sky was cloudy and
wild, we spoke the other boat, to know what stores they had, and to
overhaul what we had.  I had a compass in my pocket, a small telescope, a
double-barrelled pistol, a knife, and a fire-box and matches.  Most of my
men had knives, and some had a little tobacco: some, a pipe as well.  We
had a mug among us, and an iron spoon.  As to provisions, there were in
my boat two bags of biscuit, one piece of raw beef, one piece of raw
pork, a bag of coffee, roasted but not ground (thrown in, I imagine, by
mistake, for something else), two small casks of water, and about half-a-
gallon of rum in a keg.  The Surf-boat, having rather more rum than we,
and fewer to drink it, gave us, as I estimated, another quart into our
keg.  In return, we gave them three double handfuls of coffee, tied up in
a piece of a handkerchief; they reported that they had aboard besides, a
bag of biscuit, a piece of beef, a small cask of water, a small box of
lemons, and a Dutch cheese.  It took a long time to make these exchanges,
