of their betters, of whom we know that it is not to the most virtuous
they submit or to the most learned, but to those who, being crossed, can
conduct themselves in a manner so disagreeable, shrewish or violent, that
life is a burden until they have their will.  This the child Clorinda had
the infant wit to discover early, and having once discovered it, she
never ceased to take advantage of her knowledge.  Having found in the
days when her one desire was pap, that she had but to roar lustily enough
to find it beside her in her porringer, she tried the game upon all other
occasions.  When she had reached but a twelvemonth, she stood stoutly
upon her little feet, and beat her sisters to gain their playthings, and
her nurse for wanting to change her smock.  She was so easily thrown into
furies, and so raged and stamped in her baby way that she was a sight to
behold, and the men-servants found amusement in badgering her.  To set
Mistress Clorinda in their midst on a winter's night when they were dull,
and to torment her until her little face grew scarlet with the blood
which flew up into it, and she ran from one to the other beating them and
screaming like a young spitfire, was among them a favourite
entertainment.

"Ifackens!" said the butler one night, "but she is as like Sir Jeoffry in
her temper as one pea is like another.  Ay, but she grows blood red just
as he does, and curses in her little way as he does in man's words among
his hounds in their kennel."

"And she will be of his build, too," said the housekeeper.  "What mishap
changed her to a maid instead of a boy, I know not.  She would have made
a strapping heir.  She has the thigh and shoulders of a handsome
man-child at this hour, and she is not three years old."

"Sir Jeoffry missed his mark when he called her an ugly brat," said the
woman who had nursed her.  "She will be a handsome woman--though large in
build, it may be.  She will be a brown beauty, but she will have a colour
in her cheeks and lips like the red of Christmas holly, and her owl's
eyes are as black as sloes, and have fringes on them like the curtains of
a window.  See how her hair grows thick on her little head, and how it
curls in great rings.  My lady, her poor mother, was once a beauty, but
she was no such beauty as this one will be, for she has her father's long
limbs and fine shoulders, and the will to make every man look her way."

"Yes," said the housekeeper, who was an elderly woman, "there will be
doings--there will be doings when she is a ripe young maid.  She will
take her way, and God grant she mayn't be _too_ like her father and
follow his."

It was true that she had no resemblance to her plain sisters, and bore no
likeness to them in character.  The two elder children, Anne and Barbara,
were too meek-spirited to be troublesome; but during Clorinda's infancy
Mistress Margery Wimpole watched her rapid growth with fear and qualms.
She dare not reprove the servants who were ruining her by their
treatment, and whose manners were forming her own.  Sir Jeoffry's
servants were no more moral than their master, and being brought up as
she was among them, their young mistress became strangely familiar with
many sights and sounds it is not the fortune of most young misses of
breeding to see and hear.  The cooks and kitchen-wenches were flighty
with the grooms and men-servants, and little Mistress Clorinda, having a
passion for horses and dogs, spent many an hour in the stables with the
women who, for reasons of their own, were pleased enough to take her
there as an excuse for seeking amusement for themselves.  She played in
the kennels and among the horses' heels, and learned to use oaths as
roundly as any Giles or Tom whose work was to wield the curry comb.  It
was indeed a curious thing to hear her red baby mouth pour forth curses
and unseemly words as she would at any one who crossed her.  Her temper
and hot-headedness carried all before them, and the grooms and stable-
boys found great sport in the language my young lady used in her innocent
furies.  But balk her in a whim, and she would pour forth the eloquence
of a fish-wife or a lady of easy virtue in a pot-house quarrel.  There
was no human creature near her who had mind or heart enough to see the
awfulness of her condition, or to strive to teach her to check her
passions; and in the midst of these perilous surroundings the little
virago grew handsomer and of finer carriage every hour, as if on the rank
diet that fed her she throve and flourished.

There came a day at last when she had reached six years old, when by a
trick of chance a turn was given to the wheel of her fate.

She had not reached three when a groom first set her on a horse's back
and led her about the stable-yard, and she had so delighted in her
exalted position, and had so shouted for pleasure and clutched her
steed's rein and clucked at him, that her audience had looked on with
roars of laughter.  From that time she would be put up every day, and as
time went on showed such unchildish courage and spirit that she furnished
to her servant companions a new pastime.  Soon she would not be held on,
but riding astride like a boy, would sit up as straight as a man and
swear at her horse, beating him with her heels and little fists if his
pace did not suit her.  She knew no fear, and would have used a whip so
readily that the men did not dare to trust her with one, and knew they
must not mount her on a steed too mettlesome.  By the time she passed her
sixth birthday she could ride as well as a grown man, and was as familiar
with her father's horses as he himself, though he knew nothing of the
matter, it being always contrived that she should be out of sight when he
visited his hunters.

It so chanced that the horse he rode the oftenest was her favourite, and
many were the tempests of rage she fell into when she went to the stable
to play with the animal and did not find him in his stall, because his
master had ordered him out.  At such times she would storm at the men in
the stable-yard and call them ill names for their impudence in letting
the beast go, which would cause them great merriment, as she knew nothing
of who the man was who had balked her, since she was, in truth, not so
much as conscious of her father's existence, never having seen or even
heard more of him than his name, which she in no manner connected with
herself.

"Could Sir Jeoffry himself but once see and hear her when she storms at
us and him, because he dares to ride his own beast," one of the older men
said once, in the midst of their laughter, "I swear he would burst forth
laughing and be taken with her impudent spirit, her temper is so like his
own.  She is his own flesh and blood, and as full of hell-fire as he."

Upon this morning which proved eventful to her, she had gone to the
stables, as was her daily custom, and going into the stall where the big
black horse was wont to stand, she found it empty.  Her spirit rose hot
within her in the moment.  She clenched her fists, and began to stamp and
swear in such a manner as it would be scarce fitting to record.

"Where is he now?" she cried.  "He is my own horse, and shall not be
ridden.  Who is the man who takes him?  Who?  Who?"

"'Tis a fellow who hath no manners," said the man she stormed at,
grinning and thrusting his tongue in his cheek.  "He says 'tis his beast,
and not yours, and he will have him when he chooses."

"'Tis not his--'tis mine!" shrieked Miss, her little face inflamed with
passion.  "I will kill him!  'Tis my horse.  He _shall_ be mine!"

For a while the men tormented her, to hear her rave and see her passion,
for, in truth, the greater tempest she was in, the better she was worth
beholding, having a colour so rich, and eyes so great and black and
flaming.  At such times there was naught of the feminine in her, and
indeed always she looked more like a handsome boy than a girl, her growth
being for her age extraordinary.  At length a lad who was a helper said
to mock her--

"The man hath him at the door before the great steps now.  I saw him
stand there waiting but a moment ago.  The man hath gone in the house."

She turned and ran to find him.  The front part of the house she barely
knew the outside of, as she was kept safely in the west wing and below
stairs, and when taken out for the air was always led privately by a side
way--never passing through the great hall, where her father might chance
to encounter her.

She knew best this side-entrance, and made her way to it, meaning to
search until she found the front.  She got into the house, and her spirit
being roused, marched boldly through corridors and into rooms she had
never seen before, and being so mere a child, notwithstanding her strange
wilfulness and daring, the novelty of the things she saw so far
distracted her mind from the cause of her anger that she stopped more
than once to stare up at a portrait on a wall, or to take in her hand
something she was curious concerning.

When she at last reached the entrance-hall, coming into it through a door
she pushed open, using all her childish strength, she stood in the midst
of it and gazed about her with a new curiosity and pleasure.  It was a
fine place, with antlers, and arms, and foxes' brushes hung upon the
walls, and with carved panels of black oak, and oaken floor and
furnishings.  All in it was disorderly and showed rough usage; but once
it had been a notable feature of the house, and well worth better care
than had been bestowed upon it.  She discovered on the walls many
trophies that attracted her, but these she could not reach, and could
only gaze and wonder at; but on an old oaken settle she found some things
she could lay hands on, and forthwith seized and sat down upon the floor
to play with them.  One of them was a hunting-crop, which she brandished
grandly, until she was more taken with a powder-flask which it so
happened her father, Sir Jeoffry, had lain down but a few minutes before,
in passing through.  He was going forth coursing, and had stepped into
the dining-hall to toss off a bumper of brandy.

When he had helped himself from the buffet, and came back in haste, the
first thing he clapped eyes on was his offspring pouring forth the powder
from his flask upon the oaken floor.  He had never seen her since that
first occasion after the unfortunate incident of her birth, and beholding
a child wasting his good powder at the moment he most wanted it and had
no time to spare, and also not having had it recalled to his mind for
years that he was a parent, except when he found himself forced
reluctantly to pay for some small need, he beheld in the young offender
only some impudent servant's brat, who had strayed into his domain and
applied itself at once to mischief.

He sprang upon her, and seizing her by the arm, whirled her to her feet
with no little violence, snatching the powder-flask from her, and dealing
her a sound box on the ear.

"Blood and damnation on thee, thou impudent little baggage!" he shouted.
"I'll break thy neck for thee, little scurvy beast;" and pulled the bell
as he were like to break the wire.

But he had reckoned falsely on what he dealt with.  Miss uttered a shriek
of rage which rang through the roof like a clarion.  She snatched the
crop from the floor, rushed at him, and fell upon him like a thousand
little devils, beating his big legs with all the strength of her passion,
and pouring forth oaths such as would have done credit to Doll Lightfoot
herself.

"Damn _thee_!--damn _thee_!"--she roared and screamed, flogging him.
"I'll tear thy eyes out!  I'll cut thy liver from thee!  Damn thy soul to
hell!"

And this choice volley was with such spirit and fury poured forth, that
Sir Jeoffry let his hand drop from the bell, fell into a great burst of
