painting; we are strong ourselves. Here is a little man," he continued,
striking Nicolas Poussin on the shoulder, "who has the faculty."

Observing the shabby cap of the youth, he pulled from his belt a
leathern purse from which he took two gold pieces and offered them to
him, saying,--

"I buy your drawing."

"Take them," said Porbus to Poussin, seeing that the latter trembled
and blushed with shame, for the young scholar had the pride of poverty;
"take them, he has the ransom of two kings in his pouch."

The three left the atelier and proceeded, talking all the way of art,
to a handsome wooden house standing near the Pont Saint-Michel, whose
window-casings and arabesque decoration amazed Poussin. The embryo
painter soon found himself in one of the rooms on the ground floor
seated, beside a good fire, at a table covered with appetizing dishes,
and, by unexpected good fortune, in company with two great artists who
treated him with kindly attention.

"Young man," said Porbus, observing that he was speechless, with his
eyes fixed on a picture, "do not look at that too long, or you will fall
into despair."

It was the Adam of Mabuse, painted by that wayward genius to enable him
to get out of the prison where his creditors had kept him so long. The
figure presented such fulness and force of reality that Nicolas Poussin
began to comprehend the meaning of the bewildering talk of the old man.
The latter looked at the picture with a satisfied but not enthusiastic
manner, which seemed to say, "I have done better myself."

"There is life in the form," he remarked. "My poor master surpassed
himself there; but observe the want of truth in the background. The
man is living, certainly; he rises and is coming towards us; but the
atmosphere, the sky, the air that we breathe, see, feel,--where are
they? Besides, that is only a man; and the being who came first from
the hand of God must needs have had something divine about him which
is lacking here. Mabuse said so himself with vexation in his sober
moments."

Poussin looked alternately at the old man and at Porbus with uneasy
curiosity. He turned to the latter as if to ask the name of their host,
but the painter laid a finger on his lips with an air of mystery, and
the young man, keenly interested, kept silence, hoping that sooner or
later some word of the conversation might enable him to guess the name
of the old man, whose wealth and genius were sufficiently attested by
the respect which Porbus showed him, and by the marvels of art heaped
together in the picturesque apartment.

Poussin, observing against the dark panelling of the wall a magnificent
portrait of a woman, exclaimed aloud, "What a magnificent Giorgione!"

"No," remarked the old man, "that is only one of my early daubs."

"Zounds!" cried Poussin naively; "are you the king of painters?"

The old man smiled, as if long accustomed to such homage. "Maitre
Frenhofer," said Porbus, "could you order up a little of your good Rhine
wine for me?"

"Two casks," answered the host; "one to pay for the pleasure of
looking at your pretty sinner this morning, and the other as a mark of
friendship."

"Ah! if I were not so feeble," resumed Porbus, "and if you would consent
to let me see your Beautiful Nut-girl, I too could paint some lofty
picture, grand and yet profound, where the forms should have the living
life."

"Show my work!" exclaimed the old man, with deep emotion. "No, no! I
have still to bring it to perfection. Yesterday, towards evening, I
thought it was finished. Her eyes were liquid, her flesh trembled, her
tresses waved--she breathed! And yet, though I have grasped the secret
of rendering on a flat canvas the relief and roundness of nature, this
morning at dawn I saw many errors. Ah! to attain that glorious result,
I have studied to their depths the masters of color. I have analyzed and
lifted, layer by layer, the colors of Titian, king of light. Like him,
great sovereign of art, I have sketched my figure in light clear tones
of supple yet solid color; for shadow is but an accident,--remember
that, young man. Then I worked backward, as it were; and by means of
half-tints, and glazings whose transparency I kept diminishing little by
little, I was able to cast strong shadows deepening almost to blackness.
The shadows of ordinary painters are not of the same texture as their
tones of light. They are wood, brass, iron, anything you please except
flesh in shadow. We feel that if the figures changed position the shady
places would not be wiped off, and would remain dark spots which never
could be made luminous. I have avoided that blunder, though many of our
most illustrious painters have fallen into it. In my work you will see
whiteness beneath the opacity of the broadest shadow. Unlike the crowd
of ignoramuses, who fancy they draw correctly because they can paint one
good vanishing line, I have not dryly outlined my figures, nor brought
out superstitiously minute anatomical details; for, let me tell you, the
human body does not end off with a line. In that respect sculptors get
nearer to the truth of nature than we do. Nature is all curves, each
wrapping or overlapping another. To speak rigorously, there is no such
thing as drawing. Do not laugh, young man; no matter how strange that
saying seems to you, you will understand the reasons for it one of these
days. A line is a means by which man explains to himself the effect
of light upon a given object; but there is no such thing as a line in
nature, where all things are rounded and full. It is only in modelling
that we really draw,--in other words, that we detach things from their
surroundings and put them in their due relief. The proper distribution
of light can alone reveal the whole body. For this reason I do not
sharply define lineaments; I diffuse about their outline a haze of warm,
light half-tints, so that I defy any one to place a finger on the exact
spot where the parts join the groundwork of the picture. If seen near
by this sort of work has a woolly effect, and is wanting in nicety and
precision; but go a few steps off and the parts fall into place; they
take their proper form and detach themselves,--the body turns, the limbs
stand out, we feel the air circulating around them.

"Nevertheless," he continued, sadly, "I am not satisfied; there are
moments when I have my doubts. Perhaps it would be better not to sketch
a single line. I ask myself if I ought not to grasp the figure first by
its highest lights, and then work down to the darker portions. Is not
that the method of the sun, divine painter of the universe? O Nature,
Nature! who has ever caught thee in thy flights? Alas! the heights of
knowledge, like the depths of ignorance, lead to unbelief. I doubt my
work."

The old man paused, then resumed. "For ten years I have worked, young
man; but what are ten short years in the long struggle with Nature? We
do not know the type it cost Pygmalion to make the only statue that ever
walked--"

He fell into a reverie and remained, with fixed eyes, oblivious of all
about him, playing mechanically with his knife.

"See, he is talking to his own soul," said Porbus in a low voice.

The words acted like a spell on Nicolas Poussin, filling him with the
inexplicable curiosity of a true artist. The strange old man, with his
white eyes fixed in stupor, became to the wondering youth something more
than a man; he seemed a fantastic spirit inhabiting an unknown sphere,
and waking by its touch confused ideas within the soul. We can no more
define the moral phenomena of this species of fascination than we can
render in words the emotions excited in the heart of an exile by a song
which recalls his fatherland. The contempt which the old man affected
to pour upon the noblest efforts of art, his wealth, his manners,
the respectful deference shown to him by Porbus, his work guarded so
secretly,--a work of patient toil, a work no doubt of genius, judging by
the head of the Virgin which Poussin had so naively admired, and which,
beautiful beside even the Adam of Mabuse, betrayed the imperial touch of
a great artist,--in short, everything about the strange old man seemed
beyond the limits of human nature. The rich imagination of the youth
fastened upon the one perceptible and clear clew to the mystery of this
supernatural being,--the presence of the artistic nature, that wild
impassioned nature to which such mighty powers have been confided, which
too often abuses those powers, and drags cold reason and common souls,
and even lovers of art, over stony and arid places, where for such
there is neither pleasure nor instruction; while to the artistic soul
itself,--that white-winged angel of sportive fancy,--epics, works of
art, and visions rise along the way. It is a nature, an essence, mocking
yet kind, fruitful though destitute. Thus, for the enthusiastic Poussin,
the old man became by sudden transfiguration Art itself,--art with all
its secrets, its transports, and its dreams.

"Yes, my dear Porbus," said Frenhofer, speaking half in reverie, "I have
never yet beheld a perfect woman; a body whose outlines were faultless
and whose flesh-tints--Ah! where lives she?" he cried, interrupting his
own words; "where lives the lost Venus of the ancients, so long sought
for, whose scattered beauty we snatch by glimpses? Oh! to see for a
moment, a single moment, the divine completed nature,--the ideal,--I
would give my all of fortune. Yes; I would search thee out, celestial
Beauty! in thy farthest sphere. Like Orpheus, I would go down to hell to
win back the life of art--"

"Let us go," said Porbus to Poussin; "he neither sees nor hears us any
longer."

"Let us go to his atelier," said the wonder-struck young man.

"Oh! the old dragon has guarded the entrance. His treasure is out of our
reach. I have not waited for your wish or urging to attempt an assault
on the mystery."

"Mystery! then there is a mystery?"

"Yes," answered Porbus. "Frenhofer was the only pupil Mabuse was willing
to teach. He became the friend, saviour, father of that unhappy man, and
he sacrificed the greater part of his wealth to satisfy the mad passions
of his master. In return, Mabuse bequeathed to him the secret of relief,
the power of giving life to form,--that flower of nature, our perpetual
despair, which Mabuse had seized so well that once, having sold and
drunk the value of a flowered damask which he should have worn at
the entrance of Charles V., he made his appearance in a paper garment
painted to resemble damask. The splendor of the stuff attracted the
attention of the emperor, who, wishing to compliment the old drunkard,
laid a hand upon his shoulder and discovered the deception. Frenhofer is
a man carried away by the passion of his art; he sees above and beyond
what other painters see. He has meditated deeply on color and the
absolute truth of lines; but by dint of much research, much thought,
much study, he has come to doubt the object for which he is searching.
In his hours of despair he fancies that drawing does not exist, and that
lines can render nothing but geometric figures. That, of course, is not
true; because with a black line which has no color we can represent
the human form. This proves that our art is made up, like nature, of an
infinite number of elements. Drawing gives the skeleton, and color gives
the life; but life without the skeleton is a far more incomplete
